\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c ===========================================================================
@c
@c This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
@c
@c ===========================================================================

@comment The source is gforth.texi.in, from which gforth.texi is generated

@c s/@c <ebook>/@/g this if you want a smartphone/ebook PDF
@c <ebook>iftex
@c <ebook>internalpagesizes{150mm}{97mm}{-0.666in}{-0.95in}{0in}{0in}{160mm}{100mm}
@c <ebook>contentsrightmargin=0pt
@c <ebook>tableindent=0.1in
@c <ebook>itemindent=0.2in
@c <ebook>tolerance=700
@c <ebook>defbodyindent=0.1in
@c <ebook>lispnarrowing=0pt
@c <ebook>end iftex

@comment TODO: nac29jan99 - a list of things to add in the next edit:
@comment 1. x-ref all ambiguous or implementation-defined features?
@comment 2. Describe the use of Auser Avariable AConstant A, etc.
@comment 3. words in miscellaneous section need a home.
@comment 4. search for TODO for other minor and major works required.
@comment 5. [rats] change all @var to @i in Forth source so that info
@comment    file looks decent.
@c          Not an improvement IMO - anton
@c          and anyway, this should be taken up
@c          with Karl Berry (the texinfo guy) - anton
@c
@c Karl Berry writes:
@c  If they don't like the all-caps for @var Info output, all I can say is
@c  that it's always been that way, and the usage of all-caps for
@c  metavariables has a long tradition.  I think it's best to just let it be
@c  what it is, for the sake of consistency among manuals.
@c
@comment .. would be useful to have a word that identified all deferred words
@comment should semantics stuff in intro be moved to another section

@c POSTPONE, COMPILE, [COMPILE], LITERAL should have their own section

@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename gforth.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Gforth マニュアル
@c @syncodeindex pg cp

@c Don't use UTF-8; it will produce a large number of non-ASCII chars.
@c Instead, recode afterwards if necessary.
@documentencoding UTF-8


@macro progstyle {}
Programming style note:

@end macro

@macro assignment {}
@table @i
@item Assignment:
@end macro
@macro endassignment {}
@end table
@end macro

@comment macros for beautifying glossary entries
@macro GLOSS-START {}
@iftex
@ninerm
@end iftex
@end macro

@macro GLOSS-END {}
@iftex
@rm
@end iftex
@end macro

@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@copying
このマニュアルは、 標準 Forth 言語の高速で移植可能な実装である Gforth (バージョン @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED})用です。 これはリファレンス・マニュアルとして機能しますが、 Forth の概要と Forth
チュートリアルも含まれています。

Authors: Bernd Paysan, Anton Ertl, Gerald Wodni Copyright @copyright{} 1995,
1996, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011, 2012, 2013, 2014,2015,2016,2017,2018,2019,2020,2021,2022,2023 Free
Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual,'' and with the
Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify this
GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free Software
Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Gforth: (gforth).          forth言語のための高速インタプリタ
@end direntry
@c The Texinfo manual also recommends doing this, but for Gforth it may
@c  not make much sense
@c @dircategory Individual utilities
@c @direntry
@c * Gforth: (gforth)Invoking Gforth.      gforth, gforth-fast, gforthmi
@c @end direntry

@titlepage
@title Gforth
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Neal Crook
@author Anton Ertl
@author David Kuehling
@author Bernd Paysan
@author Jens Wilke
@author Gerald Wodni
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Goals, (dir), (dir)
@top Gforth

@insertcopying

@menu
* Goals::                    Gforthプロジェクトについて
* Gforth Environment::       Gforthの開始(と終了)
* Tutorial::                 実践的な Forth チュートリアル
* Introduction::             標準Forth(Standard Forth)の紹介
* Literals in source code::
* Words::                    Gforth で使用可能な Forth ワード
* Error messages::           エラーメッセージをどのように読み解けばいいのか
* Tools::                    プログラム作成支援ツール
* Standard conformance::     Gforth実装用に定義されたオプションなど
* Standard vs Extensions::   拡張機能を使用する必要ある?
* Model::                    Gforth の抽象マシン
* Integrating Gforth::       アプリのスクリプト言語としてのForth
* Emacs and Gforth::         The Gforth Mode
* Image Files::              @code{.fi} 
                               ファイルはコンパイル済のコードです
* Engine::                   内部インタプリタとプリミティブ・ワード
* Cross Compiler::           The Cross Compiler
* MINOS2::                   The GUI library
* Bugs::                     バグの報告方法について
* Origin::                   Gforthの作者とGforthの祖先
* Forth-related information::  書籍とWeb上の情報
* Licenses::
* Word Index::               Forth ワードのインデックス
* Concept Index::            多くのトピックを網羅したインデックス

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---



Goals of Gforth



* Stability Goals::          

Gforth Environment



* Invoking Gforth::          Gforth を起動
* Leaving Gforth::           Gforth を終了
* Help on Gforth::           Gforth内のヘルプ
* Command-line editing::     Gforth内のラインエディタ
* Environment variables::    Gforth起動に影響する環境変数
* Gforth Files::             何が何処にインストールされるか
* Gforth in pipes::          Gforth とのパイプライン入出力
* Startup speed::            14msが満足な速度ではない場合…

Forth Tutorial



* Starting Gforth Tutorial::
* Syntax Tutorial::
* Crash Course Tutorial::
* Stack Tutorial::
* Arithmetics Tutorial::
* Stack Manipulation Tutorial::
* Using files for Forth code Tutorial::
* Comments Tutorial::
* Colon Definitions Tutorial::
* Decompilation Tutorial::
* Stack-Effect Comments Tutorial::
* Types Tutorial::
* Factoring Tutorial::
* Designing the stack effect Tutorial::
* Local Variables Tutorial::
* Conditional execution Tutorial::
* Flags and Comparisons Tutorial::
* General Loops Tutorial::
* Counted loops Tutorial::
* Recursion Tutorial::
* Leaving definitions or loops Tutorial::
* Return Stack Tutorial::
* Memory Tutorial::
* Characters and Strings Tutorial::
* Alignment Tutorial::
* Floating Point Tutorial::
* Files Tutorial::
* Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy Tutorial::
* Execution Tokens Tutorial::
* Exceptions Tutorial::
* Defining Words Tutorial::
* Arrays and Records Tutorial::
* POSTPONE Tutorial::
* Literal Tutorial::
* Advanced macros Tutorial::
* Compilation Tokens Tutorial::
* Wordlists and Search Order Tutorial::  

An Introduction to Standard Forth



* Introducing the Text Interpreter::
* Stacks and Postfix notation::
* Your first definition::
* How does that work?::
* Forth is written in Forth::
* Review - elements of a Forth system::
* Where to go next::
* Exercises::                

Forth Words



* Notation::
* Case insensitivity::
* Comments::
* Boolean Flags::
* Arithmetic::
* Stack Manipulation::
* Memory::
* Strings and Characters::
* Control Structures::
* Defining Words::
* Interpretation and Compilation Semantics::
* Tokens for Words::
* Compiling words::
* The Text Interpreter::
* The Input Stream::
* Word Lists::
* Environmental Queries::
* Files::
* Blocks::
* Other I/O::
* OS command line arguments::
* Locals::
* Structures::
* Object-oriented Forth::
* Regular Expressions::
* Programming Tools::
* Multitasker::
* C Interface::
* Assembler and Code Words::
* Carnal words::
* Passing Commands to the OS::
* Keeping track of Time::
* Miscellaneous Words::      

Arithmetic



* Single precision::
* Double precision::         2倍長整数演算
* Mixed precision::          1倍長整数と2倍長整数の操作
* Integer division::
* Two-stage integer division::
* Bitwise operations::
* Numeric comparison::
* Floating Point::           

Stack Manipulation



* Data stack::
* Floating point stack::
* Return stack::
* Locals stack::
* Stack pointer manipulation::  

Memory



* Memory model::
* Dictionary allocation::
* Heap Allocation::
* Memory Access::
* Special Memory Accesses::
* Address arithmetic::
* Memory Blocks::            

Strings and Characters



* Characters::
* String representations::
* String and character literals::
* String words::
* $tring words::
* Counted string words::     

Control Structures



* Selection::                IF ... ELSE ... ENDIF
* Simple Loops::             BEGIN ...
* Counted Loops::            DO
* BEGIN loops with multiple exits::
* General control structures with CASE::
* Arbitrary control structures::
* Calls and returns::
* Exception Handling::       

Defining Words



* CREATE::
* Variables::                Variables and user variables
* Constants::
* Values::                   Initialised variables
* Varues::
* Colon Definitions::
* Anonymous Definitions::    名前無しのワード定義
* Quotations::
* Supplying names::          定義ワードの名前を文字列として渡す
* User-defined Defining Words::
* Deferred Words::           前方参照の許容
* Forward::                  自動解決される前方参照
* Aliases::                  

User-defined Defining Words



* User-defined defining words with colon definitions::
* User-defined defining words using CREATE::
* CREATE..DOES> applications::
* CREATE..DOES> details::
* Advanced does> usage example::
* User-defined TO and DEFER@@::
* User-defined compile-comma::
* Creating from a prototype::
* Making a word current::
* Const-does>::              

Interpretation and Compilation Semantics



* Combined words::           

Tokens for Words



* Execution token::          実行(execution)/インタプリタ(interpretation) 
                               セマンティクス
* Name token::               名前付きワード
* Compilation token::        コンパイル・セマンティクス

Compiling words



* Literals::                 データ値をコンパイルします
* Macros::                   Compiling words

The Text Interpreter



* Input Sources::
* Number Conversion::
* Interpret/Compile states::
* Interpreter Directives::
* Recognizers::
* Text Interpreter Hooks::   

Recognizers



* Default Recognizers::
* Dealing with existing Recognizers::
* Defining Recognizers::     

Word Lists



* Vocabularies::
* Why use word lists?::
* Word list example::        

Files



* Forth source files::
* General files::
* Redirection::
* Directories::
* Search Paths::             

Search Paths



* Source Search Paths::
* General Search Paths::     

Other I/O



* Simple numeric output::    定義済みの書式
* Formatted numeric output::  書式化された(目に見える)出力
* Floating-point output::
* Miscellaneous output::
* Displaying characters and strings::  その他もろもろ
* Terminal output::          カーソル移動等
* Single-key input::
* Line input and conversion::
* Pipes::                    あなた独自のパイプラインの作り方
* Xchars and Unicode::       非ASCII文字
* i18n and l10n::            国際化(I18n)とローカライズ
* Substitute::               テキストマクロ置換
* CSV Reader::               データ・インポート機能

Locals



* Gforth locals::
* Standard Forth locals::    

Gforth locals



* Locals definition words::
* Where are locals visible by name?::
* How long do locals live?::
* Locals programming style::
* Locals implementation::
* Closures::                 

Structures



* Why explicit structure support?::
* Structure Usage::
* Structure Naming Convention::
* Structure Implementation::
* Structure Glossary::
* Forth200x Structures::     

Object-oriented Forth



* Why object-oriented programming?::
* Object-Oriented Terminology::
* Objects::
* OOF::
* Mini-OOF::
* Mini-OOF2::
* Comparison with other object models::  

The @file{objects.fs} model



* Properties of the Objects model::
* Basic Objects Usage::
* The Objects base class::
* Creating objects::
* Object-Oriented Programming Style::
* Class Binding::
* Method conveniences::
* Classes and Scoping::
* Dividing classes::
* Object Interfaces::
* Objects Implementation::
* Objects Glossary::         

The @file{oof.fs} model



* Properties of the OOF model::
* Basic OOF Usage::
* The OOF base class::
* Class Declaration::
* Class Implementation::     

The @file{mini-oof.fs} model



* Basic Mini-OOF Usage::
* Mini-OOF Example::
* Mini-OOF Implementation::  

Programming Tools



* Locating source code definitions::  and editing
* Locating uses of a word::  @code{where}.
* Locating exception source::  バックトレースの検証(examing)
* Examining compiled code::  @code{see} and friends.
* Examining data::           スタック と メモリ
* Forgetting words::         通常、再ロード前に使われます
* Debugging::                トレーサー @code{~~} 
                               を適宜挿入することによって
* Assertions::               あなたのプログラムを自己チェックさせます
* Singlestep Debugger::      あなたのプログラムをワート単位で実行します
* Code Coverage::            実行頻度を測定します

Multitasker



* Pthreads::                 ネイティブ Unix 用マルチタスカー
* Cilk::                     Cilk風の spawn+sync 実装

Pthreads



* Basic multi-tasking::
* Task-local data::
* Semaphores::
* Hardware operations for multi-tasking::
* Message queues::           

C Interface



* Calling C Functions::
* Declaring C Functions::
* Calling C function pointers::
* Defining library interfaces::
* Declaring OS-level libraries::
* Callbacks::
* C interface internals::
* Low-Level C Interface Words::
* Automated interface generation using SWIG::
* Migrating the C interface from earlier Gforth::  

Assembler and Code Words



* Assembler Definitions::    Definitions in assembly language
* Common Assembler::         アセンブラ文法
* Common Disassembler::
* 386 Assembler::            逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* AMD64 Assembler::
* Alpha Assembler::          逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* MIPS assembler::           逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* PowerPC assembler::        逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* ARM Assembler::            逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* Other assemblers::         アセンブラ自体の書き方

Carnal words



* Header fields::
* Header methods::
* Threading Words::          

Tools



* Standard Report::          使用されたワードをワードセットごとにソートして報告します
* Stack depth changes::      このスタック値はどこから来たのか?

Standard conformance



* The Core Words::
* The optional Block word set::
* The optional Double Number word set::
* The optional Exception word set::
* The optional Facility word set::
* The optional File-Access word set::
* The optional Floating-Point word set::
* The optional Locals word set::
* The optional Memory-Allocation word set::
* The optional Programming-Tools word set::
* The optional Search-Order word set::  

The Core Words



* core-idef::                Implementation Defined Options
* core-ambcond::             あいまいな条件
* core-other::               その他のシステム・ドキュメント                  

The optional Block word set



* block-idef::               Implementation Defined Options
* block-ambcond::            あいまいな条件
* block-other::              その他のシステム・ドキュメント                 

The optional Double Number word set



* double-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              

The optional Exception word set



* exception-idef::           Implementation Defined Options              

The optional Facility word set



* facility-idef::            Implementation Defined Options
* facility-ambcond::         あいまいな条件            

The optional File-Access word set



* file-idef::                Implementation Defined Options
* file-ambcond::             あいまいな条件                

The optional Floating-Point word set



* floating-idef::            Implementation Defined Options
* floating-ambcond::         あいまいな条件            

The optional Locals word set



* locals-idef::              Implementation Defined Options
* locals-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              

The optional Memory-Allocation word set



* memory-idef::              Implementation Defined Options                 

The optional Programming-Tools word set



* programming-idef::         Implementation Defined Options
* programming-ambcond::      あいまいな条件         

The optional Search-Order word set



* search-idef::              Implementation Defined Options
* search-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              

Emacs and Gforth



* Installing gforth.el::     Emacs に Forth を認識させる
* Emacs Tags::               ワードのソースを Emacs で閲覧
* Hilighting::               Forth コードの見栄えを良くします
* Auto-Indentation::         自動インデントのカスタマイズ
* Blocks Files::             ブロック・ファイルの読み書き

Image Files



* Image Licensing Issues::   イメージの配布条件
* Image File Background::    なぜイメージ・ファイルがあるのですか?
* Non-Relocatable Image Files::  ※これは常に機能するとは限りません
* Data-Relocatable Image Files::  ※こちらの方がよいです
* Fully Relocatable Image Files::  ※こちらの方がもっといいです
* Stack and Dictionary Sizes::  イメージでのデフォルト・サイズを設定
* Running Image Files::      @code{gforth -i @i{file}} or @i{file}.
* Modifying the Startup Sequence::  ターンキー・アプリケーションにする事もできる

Fully Relocatable Image Files



* gforthmi::                 通常の方法
* cross.fs::                 困難な方法

Engine



* Portability::
* Threading::
* Primitives::
* Performance::              

Threading



* Scheduling::
* Direct or Indirect Threaded?::
* Dynamic Superinstructions::
* DOES>::                    

Primitives



* Automatic Generation::
* TOS Optimization::
* Produced code::            

Cross Compiler



* Using the Cross Compiler::
* How the Cross Compiler Works::  

MINOS2, a GUI library



* MINOS2 object framework::
* MINOS2 tutorial::          

MINOS2 object framework



* actor methods::
* widget methods::           

Licenses



* GNU Free Documentation License::  このマニュアルのコピー時のライセンス
* Copying::                  GPL (このソフトウェアのコピー用)

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@c ----------------------------------------------------------
@iftex
@unnumbered Preface
@cindex Preface
このマニュアルは Gforth について説明します。 Forth に慣れていない読者、 または他の Forth コンパイラから Gforth
に移行する読者向けに、 いくつかの入門資料が提供されています。 ただし、 このマニュアルの主体はリファレンス・マニュアルです。
@end iftex

@comment TODO much more blurb here.

@c ******************************************************************
@node Goals, Gforth Environment, Top, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter Goals of Gforth
@cindex goals of the Gforth project
Gforth プロジェクトの目標(goal)は 標準Forth(Standard Forth)のための標準の模範(model)を開発することです。
これは以下のように、 幾つかの副目標に落とし込めます:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Gforth は Forth 標準(Forth Standard)に準拠すべきです。
@item
これは模範(model)になるべきです。 つまり、 実装に依存するものをすべて定義する必要があります。
@item
これは標準、つまり、広く受け入れられ、使用されるべきです。 この目標は最も難しい目標です。
@end itemize

上記の目標を達成するには Gforth は以下のようにするべきです
@itemize @bullet
@item
以前の模範(model)(fig-Forth, F83)に似にせること。
@item
強力であること。 今日必要であると考えられているすべてのものと、 まだ必要であると考えられていないものさえも提供する必要があります。
@item
効率的であること。 異常に遅いという評判を得るべきではありません。
@item
無料であること。
@item
多くのマシンで利用可能かつ移植も簡単であること。
@end itemize

私達はこれらの目標を達成できているでしょうか？ Gforth は、 Forth-94 (ANS Forth) と Forth-2012
標準に準拠しています。 内部データ構造の一部 (特にヘッダー) は時間の経過とともに変更されているため、 Gforth
は安定しているモデルとは見なさていません。 確かにまだ事実上​​の標準にはなっていませんが、 かなり人気があるようです。
以前のモデルとの類似点と相違点がいくつかあります。 いくつかの強力な機能がありますが、 まだ私たちが想像していたもの全てを備えているわけではありません。
私たちは確かに実行速度の目標を達成しました(@pxref{Performance})@footnote{ただし、 1998 年に主要な商用 Forth
ベンダーがネイティブ・コード・コンパイラに切り替えたとき、 その基準は引き上げられてしまいました。 }。 Gforth
は無料で、多くのマシンで利用できます。


@menu
* Stability Goals::          
@end menu

@c ******************************************************************
@node Stability Goals, , Goals, Goals
@section Stability Goals
@cindex Gforth stability
@cindex stability of Gforth

(Gforthの安定性)Gforth の以前のバージョンで動作するプログラムは、 新しいバージョンでも動作するはずです。 ただし、
以下のようないくつかの注意点があります:

Gforth の内部データ構造 (コンパイル済みコードの表現を含む) は、 文書化されていない限り、 バージョン間で変更される可能性があります。

さらに、 私達は、 標準のワード (つまり、 標準のワードセットにある名前のワード)と、 永続的な Gforth
拡張機能として文書化されたワード(ワードセット名が @code{gforth} または @code{gforth-@i{<version>}}
であるワード)(@pxref{Notation} 参照)は、 保持する義務があると考えています。
他のワードは新しいリリースでは削除される可能性があります。

とりわけ、 あなたは @code{locate} を使用するか、 または、 Gforth のソース・コードを調べることでワードを見つけることができ、
スタック効果コメントの直後のコメントでワードセットを確認できます。 そのワードにワードセットがない場合、 それは内部実装であり、
将来のバージョンでは削除される可能性があります。 ワードセットが @code{gforth-experimental} または
@code{gforth-internal} または @code{gforth-obsolete} の場合、
そのワードは将来のバージョンで削除される可能性があります。

あなたが永続的としてマークされていない特定のワードを使用したい場合、 私達にご連絡ください。
そのワードを永続的ワードとして追加することを検討します(または、このワードに代わる代替案を提案する場合もあります)。

@c ******************************************************************
@node Gforth Environment, Tutorial, Goals, Top
@chapter Gforth Environment
@cindex Gforth environment

メモ: Gforth のマニュアル・ページ(man page)は、 結局のところ、 この章の内容から自動生成されています。

@menu
* Invoking Gforth::          Gforth を起動
* Leaving Gforth::           Gforth を終了
* Help on Gforth::           Gforth内のヘルプ
* Command-line editing::     Gforth内のラインエディタ
* Environment variables::    Gforth起動に影響する環境変数
* Gforth Files::             何が何処にインストールされるか
* Gforth in pipes::          Gforth とのパイプライン入出力
* Startup speed::            14msが満足な速度ではない場合…
@end menu

イメージの作成に関する関連情報については @ref{Image Files} を参照してください。

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Invoking Gforth, Leaving Gforth, Gforth Environment, Gforth Environment
@section Invoking Gforth
@cindex invoking Gforth
@cindex running Gforth
@cindex command-line options
@cindex options on the command line
@cindex flags on the command line

Gforth は 2 つの部分から成ります。 実行可能「エンジン」(@command{gforth} または @command{gforth-fast}
という名前)と、イメージ・ファイルです。 Gforth を開始するには、 通常は @code{gforth} とするだけです。 これにより、
デフォルトのイメージ・ファイル @file{gforth.fi} が自動的にロードされます。 他の多くの場合、 デフォルトの Gforth
イメージは以下のように呼び出されます:
@example
gforth [file | -e forth-code] ...
@end example
@noindent
これにより、 ファイルの内容や、 (訳注:コマンドラインに記述された、) Forth コードが、 指定の順序で解釈(interpret)されます。

@command{gforth} エンジンに加えて、 @command{gforth-fast} というエンジンもあります。 これは高速ですが、
表示されるエラー・メッセージ(@pxref{Error messages})の情報が少なく、 そして、 一部のエラーのキャッチ(特に、
スタック・アンダーフローや整数除算エラーなど)が遅れて発生するか、 あるいはまったく発生しません。 デバッグ済みの、
パフォーマンスが重要なプログラムに対して使用するべきです。

さらに、 @command{gforth-itc} というエンジンがあり、 下位互換性が必要な状況(@pxref{Direct or Indirect
Threaded?})で役に立ちます。

一般に、 コマンドラインは以下のようになります:

@example
gforth[-fast] [engine options] [image options]
@end example

エンジン・オプションは、 コマンド・ラインの他の部分より前に指定する必要があります。 それらは以下のとおりです:

@c !! vollstaendig?
@table @code
@cindex -i, command-line option
@cindex --image-file, command-line option
@item --image-file @i{file}
@itemx -i @i{file}
デフォルトの @file{gforth.fi} の代わりに、 指定の Forth イメージ・ファイルをロードします(@pxref{Image
Files})。

@cindex --appl-image, command-line option
@item --appl-image @i{file}
指定のイメージ・ファイルをロードし、 これ以降のコマンドライン引数は(エンジンのオプションとして処理するのではなく)、
すべてそのイメージが処理する為に残します。 これは、 @code{gforthmi --application ...} で構築された、 Unix
上で実行可能なアプリケーション・イメージを構築する場合に便利です。

@cindex --path, command-line option
@cindex -p, command-line option
@item --path @i{path}
@itemx -p @i{path}
デフォルトである環境変数 @code{GFORTHPATH} 、 またはインストール時に指定されたパス(例:
@file{/usr/local/share/gforth/0.2.0:.})と作業ディレクトリ @code{.} の代わりに、
指定のパスを使用してイメージ・ファイルと Forth ソース・コード・ファイルを検索します。 パスは @samp{:}
で区切られたディレクトリのリストとして指定されます(以前のバージョンには他の OS 用に @samp{;} がありましたが、 Cygwin は現在は
@code{/cygdrive/<letter>} のみを受け入れ、 かつ、 私達は OS/2 や MS-DOS のサポートは終了してしまったため、
どこでも全部 @samp{:} になりました)。

@cindex --dictionary-size, command-line option
@cindex -m, command-line option
@cindex @i{size} parameters for command-line options
@cindex size of the dictionary and the stacks
@item --dictionary-size @i{size}
@itemx -m @i{size}
イメージで指定されているデフォルト(通常は 256K)を使用する代わりに、 Forth
ディクショナリ用のスペースに指定サイズ(@i{size})のスペースを割り当てます。
このオプションと、下記のオプションのサイズ(@i{size})指定は整数と単位で構成されます(例: @code{4M})。 単位は @code{b}
(バイト)、 @code{e} (elementの略。セル単位)、 @code{k} (キロバイト)、 @code{M} (メガバイト)、
@code{G} (ギガバイト)、 @code{T} (テラバイト)のいずれかになります。 単位が指定されていない場合 @code{e}
が使用されます。

@cindex --data-stack-size, command-line option
@cindex -d, command-line option
@item --data-stack-size @i{size}
@itemx -d @i{size}
イメージで指定されているデフォルト(通常は 16K) を使用する代わりに、
データ・スタックに指定のサイズ(@i{size})のスペースを割り当てます。サイズ(@i{size})指定は整数と単位で構成されます(例:
@code{4M})。 単位は @code{b} (バイト)、 @code{e} (elementの略。セル単位)、 @code{k} (キロバイト)、
@code{M} (メガバイト)、 @code{G} (ギガバイト)、 @code{T} (テラバイト)のいずれかになります。
単位が指定されていない場合 @code{e} が使用されます。

@cindex --return-stack-size, command-line option
@cindex -r, command-line option
@item --return-stack-size @i{size}
@itemx -r @i{size}
イメージで指定されたデフォルト(通常は 15K)を使用する代わりに、 リターン・スタックに指定のサイズ(@i{size})のスペースを割り当てます。
サイズ(@i{size})指定は整数と単位で構成されます(例: @code{4M})。 単位は @code{b} (バイト)、 @code{e}
(elementの略。セル単位)、 @code{k} (キロバイト)、 @code{M} (メガバイト)、 @code{G} (ギガバイト)、
@code{T} (テラバイト)のいずれかになります。 単位が指定されていない場合 @code{e} が使用されます。

@cindex --fp-stack-size, command-line option
@cindex -f, command-line option
@item --fp-stack-size @i{size}
@itemx -f @i{size}
イメージで指定されているデフォルト(通常は 15.5K)を使用する代わりに、
浮動小数点スタックに指定のサイズ(@i{size})のスペースを割り当てます。この場合、単位指定子 @code{e} は浮動小数点数を参照します。
サイズ(@i{size})指定は整数と単位で構成されます(例: @code{4M})。 単位は @code{b} (バイト)、 @code{e}
(elementの略。セル単位)、 @code{k} (キロバイト)、 @code{M} (メガバイト)、 @code{G} (ギガバイト)、
@code{T} (テラバイト)のいずれかになります。 単位が指定されていない場合 @code{e} が使用されます。

@cindex --locals-stack-size, command-line option
@cindex -l, command-line option
@item --locals-stack-size @i{size}
@itemx -l @i{size}
イメージで指定されているデフォルト(通常は 14.5K)を使用する代わりに、 ローカル・スタック(locals
stack)に指定サイズ(@i{size})のスペースを割り当てます。 サイズ(@i{size})指定は整数と単位で構成されます(例:
@code{4M})。 単位は @code{b} (バイト)、 @code{e} (elementの略。セル単位)、 @code{k} (キロバイト)、
@code{M} (メガバイト)、 @code{G} (ギガバイト)、 @code{T} (テラバイト)のいずれかになります。
単位が指定されていない場合 @code{e} が使用されます。

@cindex --vm-commit, command-line option
@cindex overcommit memory for dictionary and stacks
@cindex memory overcommit for dictionary and stacks
@item --vm-commit
通常 Gforth は、 ディクショナリとスタックに十分な仮想メモリ(virtual memory)がない場合でも起動しようとします(OS
がサポートしていれば @code{MAP_NORESERVE} を使用します)。 したがって、
あなたは非常に大きなディクショナリやスタックを要求することができ、 利用可能なのを超える仮想メモリを使用しない限り、
すべて問題ありません(ただし、それを超えて使用すると、 プロセスが強制終了(kill)されます)。 このオプションを使用すると、 OS
のデフォルトの割り当てポリシーを使用するようになります。 とりわけ、 オーバーコミットしない OS (Solaris など) の場合、 これは、
大きなディクショナリやスタックを要求することはできませんし、 要求すべきではないことを意味しますが、 しかし、 Gforth
が正常に起動する事に成功したならば、 メモリ不足によって強制終了(kill)させられることはありません。

@cindex -h, command-line option
@cindex --help, command-line option
@item --help
@itemx -h
コマンドライン・オプションに関するメッセージを出力します

@cindex -v, command-line option
@cindex --version, command-line option
@item --version
@itemx -v
バージョンを出力して終了(exit)

@cindex --debug, command-line option
@item --debug
起動時のデバッグに役立ついくつかの情報を出力します。

@cindex --offset-image, command-line option
@item --offset-image
それ以外の場合に使用される位置とはわずかに異なる位置でディクショナリを開始します (データ再配置可能イメージ(data-relocatable
images)の作成に役立ちます @pxref{Data-Relocatable Image Files})。

@cindex --no-offset-im, command-line option
@item --no-offset-im
ディクショナリを通常の位置で開始します。

@cindex --clear-dictionary, command-line option
@item --clear-dictionary
イメージをロードする前に、 ディクショナリ内の全てのバイトを 0 に初期化します(@pxref{Data-Relocatable Image
Files})。

@cindex --die-on-signal, command-line-option
@item --die-on-signal
通常、 Gforth はほとんどのシグナル(例えば、 ユーザー割り込みの SIGINT や、 セグメンテーション違反 SIGSEGV)を Forth の
@code{THROW} に変換することで処理します。 このオプションを使用すると、 Gforth
はそのようなシグナルを受信すると終了(exit)します。 このオプションは、
(最初のシグナルから回復する前に別のシグナルが発生するなど、)エンジンやイメージがひどく壊れている可能性がある場合に役立ちます。 このオプションは、
そのような場合の無限ループを回避します。

@cindex --no-dynamic, command-line option
@cindex --dynamic, command-line option
@item --no-dynamic
@item --dynamic
レプリケーション(replication)を伴う動的スーパー命令(dynamic
superinstructions)を無効または有効にします(@pxref{Dynamic Superinstructions})。

@cindex --no-super, command-line option
@item --no-super
動的スーパー命令(dynamic superinstructions)を無効にし、 動的レプリケーション(dynamic
replication)のみを使用します。 これは、 スレッド化コード(threaded
code)にパッチを適用する場合に便利です(@pxref{Dynamic Superinstructions})。

@cindex --ss-number, command-line option
@item --ss-number=@var{N}
エンジンにコンパイル済みの最初の @var{N} 個の静的スーパー命令(static
superinstructions)のみを使用します(デフォルトでは全てを使用します。 注意: @code{gforth-fast}
のみのオプションです)。 このオプションは、 静的スーパー命令(static
superinstructions)のパフォーマンスへの影響を測定するのに役立ちます。

@cindex --ss-min-..., command-line options
@item --ss-min-codesize
@item --ss-min-ls
@item --ss-min-lsu
@item --ss-min-nexts
指定のメトリックを使用して、 静的スーパー命令の選択(static superinstruction
selection)をするためにプリミティブまたは静的スーパー命令のコストを決定します。 @code{Codesize}
はプリミティブまたは静的スーパー命令のネイティブ・コード・サイズ、 そして、 @code{ls} はロードとストアの数、 そして、 @code{lsu}
はロードとストアと更新の数、 そして、 @code{nexts} は(動的スーパー命令を考慮しない)ディスパッチの数です。 ここで、
すべてのプリミティブまたは静的スーパー命令のコストは 1 です。 デフォルトでは、 動的コード生成を使用する場合は @code{codesize}、
それ以外の場合は @code{nexts} です。

@cindex --ss-greedy, command-line option
@item --ss-greedy
このオプションは、 静的スーパー命令のパフォーマンスへの影響を測定するのに役立ちます。 デフォルトでは、
静的スーパー命令の選択には最適な最短パス・アルゴリズム(shortest-path algorithm)が使用されます。
@option{--ss-greedy} を使用すると、 そのアルゴリズムは、
現在検討中の静的スーパー命令以降は静的スーパー命令に結合されないと想定するように変更されます。 @option{--ss-min-nexts}
を使用すると、 その時点で利用可能な最長のスーパー命令を常に選択する貪欲なアルゴリズムと同じ結果が生成されます。 たとえば、スーパー命令 AB と
BCD がある場合、 シーケンス A B C D に対して、 最適アルゴリズムは A BCD を選択し、 貪欲アルゴリズムは AB C D
を選択します。

@cindex --print-metrics, command-line option
@item --print-metrics
静的スーパー命令の選択中に使用されるいくつかのメトリックを出力します。 @code{code size} は、
動的に生成されたコードの実際のサイズです。  @code{Metric codesize}
は、静的スーパー命令の選択によって確認できるコードサイズ・メトリック(codesize metrics)の合計で、 @code{code size}
とは異なります。 これは、 すべてのプリミティブと静的スーパー命令が動的に生成されるコードにコンパイルされるわけではないことと、
マーカーがあるためです。 他のメトリクスは @option{ss-min-...} オプションに対応します。
このオプションは、@option{--ss-...} オプションの効果を評価するのに役立ちます。

@end table

@cindex loading files at startup
@cindex executing code on startup
@cindex batch processing with Gforth
上記にて説明したように、 デフォルト・イメージである @file{gforth.fi} のイメージ固有のコマンドライン引数は、 一連のファイル名と、
指定した順序で解釈(interpret)される @code{-e @var{forth-code}} オプションで構成されます。 @code{-e
@var{forth-code}} または @code{--evaluate @var{forth-code}} オプションは Forth
コードを評価(evaluate)します。 このオプションは引数を 1 つだけ取ります。 あなたが、もし、 さらに多くの Forth
ワードを評価したい場合は、 ワードを引用符で囲むか、 @code{-e} を複数回使用する必要があります。
コマンド・ラインの処理後に(対話モードに入るのではなく、)終了(exit)するには、 コマンド・ラインに @code{-e bye} を追加します。
Forth プログラムではコマンド・ライン引数を処理することもできます(@pxref{OS command line arguments})。

@cindex versions, invoking other versions of Gforth
複数のバージョンの Gforth がインストールされている場合、 @code{gforth} は最後にインストールされたバージョンを呼び出します。
@code{gforth-@i{<version>}} は特定のバージョンを呼び出します。 あなたの環境に環境変数 @code{GFORTHPATH}
がある場合、 @code{--path} オプションを使用してこの環境変数をオーバーライドできます。

起動時、 イメージ・オプションを処理する前に、 環境変数 @code{GFORTH_ENV} で指定されたユーザー初期化ファイル、
またはその環境変数が設定されていない場合は(存在する場合、) @file{~/.config/gforthrc0} がインクルードされます。
@code{GFORTH_ENV} が「@code{off}」の場合は何もインクルードしません。 すべてのイメージ・オプションを処理した後、
ブート・メッセージを出力する直前に、 オプション @code{--no-rc} が指定されていない限り、 ホーム・ディレクトリのユーザー初期化ファイル
@file{~/.config/gforthrc} がインクルードされます。

警告レベルは以下のように設定できます

@table @code
@cindex -W, command-line option
@item -W
警告(warnings)をオフにする

@cindex -Won, command-line option
@item -Won
警告(warnings)をオンにする(レベル 1)

@cindex -Wall, command-line option
@item -Wall
初心者向け警告をオンにする(レベル 2)

@cindex -Wpedantic, command-line option
@item -Wpedantic
細かい構文的な警告(pedantic warnings)をオンにする(レベル 3)

@cindex -Werror, command-line option
@item -Werror
警告をエラーとして出す(レベル 4)
@end table

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Leaving Gforth, Help on Gforth, Invoking Gforth, Gforth Environment
@section Leaving Gforth
@cindex Gforth - leaving
@cindex leaving Gforth

@code{bye} または (行の先頭で、) @kbd{Ctrl-d} または (@code{--die-on-signal} オプションを指定して
Gforth を起動した場合、) @kbd{Ctrl+C} を入力すると、 Gforth を終了できます。 Gforth を終了すると、
あなたの定義とデータはすべて破棄されます。 Gforth を終了する前にシステムの状態を保存する方法については、 @ref{Image Files}
を参照してください。

doc-bye

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Help on Gforth, Command-line editing, Leaving Gforth, Gforth Environment
@section Help on Gforth
@cindex help

Gforth には、 シンプルなテキストベースのオンライン・ヘルプ・システムがあります。

@findex help ( @var{ "rest-of-line" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{help}
@kindex help
@format
@code{help} ( @i{"rest-of-line" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``help''
@end format
名前が指定されていない場合は、 基礎的なヘルプが表示されます。 ドキュメント・ノード名に `::` が続く場合、 ノードの最初を表示します。
ワードの名前が指定されている場合、 そのワードのドキュメントが存在する場合はそのドキュメントを、 存在しない場合はソース・コードを表示します。
@code{g} を使用して、 @code{help} で表示された場所でエディタに入ります。 @code{Help} は現在の位置をマークするため、
@code{n} と @code{b} を使用してテキストの詳細を表示したり、 @code{g}
を使用してエディターでドキュメントにアクセスしたりできます(@pxref{Locating source code definitions})。


@findex authors ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{authors}
@kindex authors
@format
@code{authors} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``authors''
@end format
著者のリストを表示


@findex license ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{license}
@kindex license
@format
@code{license} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``license''
@end format
ライセンス声明を出力します



@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Command-line editing, Environment variables, Help on Gforth, Gforth Environment
@section Command-line editing
@cindex command-line editing

Gforth は、 テキスト・インタプリタに入力したすべての行を記録するヒストリ・ファイルを維持しています。
このファイルはセッションをまたいで保存され、 コマンドラインの再呼び出し機能を提供するために使用されます。 @kbd{Ctrl-P}
を繰り返し入力すると、このセッション(または前のセッション)から古いコマンドを連続して呼び出すことができます。
コマンドライン編集機能の完全なリストは以下のとおりです:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-p} (``previous'') (または「↑」上矢印)を使用して、 ヒストリ・バッファーから古い行を順に呼び出します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-n} (``next'')(または「↓」下矢印)を押すと、 ヒストリ・バッファーからより新しい行を連続して呼び出します。
以前に古い行に移動し、 それをテキスト解釈(text-interpretation)のために Gforth に与えた場合、
最初の編集コマンドとして「nextコマンド」を要求すると、 最後に選択した行の次の行が表示されます。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-f} (または「→」右矢印)を使用して、 非破壊的にカーソルを右に移動します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-b} (または「←」左矢印)を使用して、 非破壊的にカーソルを左に移動します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-h} (backspace) カーソルの左側の文字を削除し、 桁を詰めます。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-k} カーソルから行末までを削除 (``kill'') します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-a} カーソルを行頭に移動します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-e} カーソルを行末に移動します。
@item
@key{RET} (@kbd{Ctrl-m}) または @key{LFD} (@kbd{Ctrl-j}) 現在行を gforth へ送ります
@item
@key{TAB} 現在入力中のワードの、 可能なすべての全ワード補完をステップ実行します。
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-d} 空行で押すと Gforth を終了(terminate)します。 (@code{bye} 使用すると正常に終了します)。 
@item
@kbd{Ctrl-x} (空行以外では @code{Ctrl-d} も使えます) カーソル位置の文字を削除します。
@end itemize

編集中、 表示可能な文字はカーソル位置の左側に挿入されます。
行は常に(「上書きモード」(overstrike)ではなく、)「挿入モード」(insert)です。

@cindex history file
@cindex @file{.gforth-history}
Unix システムでは、 ヒストリ・ファイルは デフォルトでは
@file{$HOME/.local/share/gforth/history}です@footnote{つまり、
ユーザーのホーム・ディレクトリに保存されます。}。 以下のコマンドを使用して、 ヒストリ・ファイルの名前と場所を確認できます:

@example
history-file type \ Unix-class systems

history-file type \ Other systems
history-dir  type
@end example

あなたが長い定義を手入力した場合、 テキスト・エディターを使用してヒストリ・ファイルから Forth ソース・ファイルに貼り付け、 後で再利用できます。

Gforth はヒストリ・ファイルのサイズを決して削減しないため、 あなたは必要に応じて定期的にヒストリ・ファイルのサイズを削減する必要があります。

@comment this is all defined in history.fs
@comment NAC TODO the ctrl-D behaviour can either do a bye or a beep.. how is that option
@comment chosen?


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Environment variables, Gforth Files, Command-line editing, Gforth Environment
@section Environment variables
@cindex environment variables

Gforth は以下の環境変数を使用します:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex @code{GFORTHHIST} -- environment variable
@code{GFORTHHIST} -- (Unix系のみ) ヒストリ・ファイル @file{.gforth-history} のパスを指定。
デフォルト: @code{$HOME/.local/share/gforth/history}.

@item
@cindex @code{GFORTHPATH} -- environment variable
@code{GFORTHPATH} -- gforth イメージ・ファイルと Forth ソースコード・ファイル
を検索するときに使用するパスを指定(通常 @samp{.} 、現在の作業ディレクトリ)。 パス区切り文字は @samp{:} です。
@file{/usr/local/share/gforth/1.0:.} みたいなのが典型です。

@item
@cindex @code{LANG} -- environment variable
@code{LANG} -- @code{LC_CTYPE} 参照

@item
@cindex @code{LC_ALL} -- environment variable
@code{LC_ALL} -- @code{LC_CTYPE} 参照

@item
@cindex @code{LC_CTYPE} -- environment variable
@code{LC_CTYPE} -- Gforth の起動時にこの環境変数が ``UTF-8'' を含んでいる場合、 Gforth は内部で文字列に
UTF-8 エンコーディングを使用し、 UTF-8 エンコーディングでの入力を期待し、 UTF-8 エンコーディングで出力を生成します。
それ以外の場合、 エンコーディングは 8 ビットです(@pxref{Xchars and Unicode})。 この環境変数が設定されていない場合、
Gforth は @code{LC_ALL} を調べ、 それも設定されていない場合は @code{LANG} を調べます。

@item
@cindex @code{GFORTHSYSTEMPREFIX} -- environment variable
@code{GFORTHSYSTEMPREFIX} -- C言語 の @code{system()} に渡す前に @code{system}
の引数に何を付加するかを指定します。 デフォルト: Windows では @code{"./$COMSPEC /c "}で、他の OS では
@code{""} です。 このプレフィックスとコマンドは直接連結されるため、 間にスペースが必要な場合はプレフィックスに追加してください。

@item
@cindex @code{GFORTH} -- environment variable
@code{GFORTH} -- @file{gforthmi} によって使用されます(@xref{gforthmi})。

@item
@cindex @code{GFORTHD} -- environment variable
@code{GFORTHD} -- @file{gforthmi} によって使用されます(@xref{gforthmi})。

@item
@cindex @code{TMP}, @code{TEMP} - environment variable
@code{TMP}, @code{TEMP} - (Unix系以外) ヒストリ・ファイルの場所として暗黙に使用されます。
@end itemize

@comment also POSIXELY_CORRECT LINES COLUMNS HOME but no interest in
@comment mentioning these.

すべての Gforth 環境変数は、 設定されていない場合、 デフォルトで適切な値になります。


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Gforth Files, Gforth in pipes, Environment variables, Gforth Environment
@section Gforth files
@cindex Gforth files

Gforth を Unix系にインストールすると、 デフォルトでは以下の場所にファイルがインストールされます:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@file{/usr/local/bin/gforth}
@item
@file{/usr/local/bin/gforthmi}
@item
@file{/usr/local/man/man1/gforth.1} - man page.
@item
@file{/usr/local/info} - the Info version of this manual.
@item
@file{/usr/local/lib/gforth/<version>/...} - Gforth @file{.fi} files.
@item
@file{/usr/local/share/gforth/<version>/TAGS} - Emacs TAGS file.
@item
@file{/usr/local/share/gforth/<version>/...} - Gforth source files.
@item
@file{.../emacs/site-lisp/gforth.el} - Emacs gforth mode.
@end itemize

@code{configure} のオプションを使用すると、 インストール先に違う場所を選択できます(どんなオプションがあるかは
@code{configure --help} してください)。

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Gforth in pipes, Startup speed, Gforth Files, Gforth Environment
@section Gforth in pipes
@cindex pipes, Gforth as part of

Gforth は、他の場所で作成されたパイプラインを使用できます(以下で説明します)。
独自にパイプラインを作成することもできます(@pxref{Pipes})。

@cindex input from pipes
Gforth にパイプライン入力する場合、 プログラムは @code{stdin} から @code{read-file} または
@code{read-line} を使用して読み取る必要があります(@pxref{General files})。 @code{Key}
は入力の終わりを認識しません。  @code{accept} のようなワードは入力をエコーするため、
通常はパイプラインからの読み取りには役に立ちません。 あなたは、
(Forthのテキスト・インタープリタはパイプライン入力を解釈(interpret)しようとしてしまうため、)Forth内のコマンド・ラインを使用する機会はなく、
OSのコマンド・ライン・オプションを使用して Forth プログラムを呼び出す必要があります。

@cindex output in pipes
あなたは @code{type}、 @code{emit}、 @code{cr} などでパイプラインへ出力できます。

@cindex silent exiting from Gforth
もう一方の端で既に閉じられているパイプラインに書き込むと、 Gforth は SIGPIPE シグナル(「パイプが壊れた」シグナル)を受け取ります。
Gforth はこれを例外 @code{broken-pipe-error} に変換します。 あなたのアプリケーションがその例外をキャッチしない場合、
システムはその例外をキャッチして、 通常は黙って終了(exit)します(Forth コマンド・ラインで作業している場合を除き、
エラー・メッセージを出力して終了します)。 これは通常、 望ましい動作です。

この振る舞いが気に入らない場合は、 自分で例外をキャッチし、 対応する必要があります。

ここで、 パイプライン内で使用できる Gforth の呼び出しの例を以下に示します:

@example
gforth -e ": foo begin pad dup 10 stdin read-file throw dup while \
 type repeat ; foo bye"
@end example

この例では、 入力をそのまま出力にコピーするだけです。 この例を含む非常に単純なパイプラインは以下のようになります:

@example
cat startup.fs |
gforth -e ": foo begin pad dup 80 stdin read-file throw dup while \
 type repeat ; foo bye"|
head
@end example

@cindex stderr and pipes
Gforth の @code{stderr} 出力に関連するパイプラインは機能しません。

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Startup speed, , Gforth in pipes, Gforth Environment
@section Startup speed
@cindex Startup speed
@cindex speed, startup

Gforth を CGI スクリプトやシェルスクリプトで使用する場合、 起動速度が問題になる場合があります。 libc-2.7 を搭載した 64 ビット
Linux 2.6.27.8 上の 3GHz Core 2 Duo E8400 では、 @code{gforth-fast -e bye}
でユーザー時間は 13.1 ミリ秒、システム時間は 1.2 ミリ秒かかります(@code{gforth -e bye} は、
下記で説明するオプションの一部を組み込んでいるため、 ユーザー時間は約 3.4 ミリ秒、 システム時間は 1.2 ミリ秒で起動がより高速になります)。

起動速度が問題になる場合は、 以下の改善方法を検討してください。 または、 起動の数を減らす方法(Fast-CGI
の使用など)を検討することもできます。 以下の最初の手順では、 (コンパイル時間を含む)実行時間を犠牲にして起動時間を短縮するため、
それで利益が得られるかどうかはあなたのアプリケーションでのこれらの時間のバランスによって決まることに注意してください。

Gforth の起動速度に影響を及ぼす簡単な手順は、 実行時間(run-time)を増加させながらイメージの読み込み時間(image-loading
time)を短縮する多数のオプションを使用してみることです。

最初に試す必要があるのは @code{--ss-number=0 --ss-states=1} です。
このオプションは実行時の高速化が比較的わずかなのに、 起動時にかなりの時間がかかるためです。 @code{gforth-fast
--ss-number=0 --ss-states=1 -e bye} には、 ユーザー時間が約 2.8 ミリ秒、 システム時間が約 1.5
ミリ秒かかります。

次のオプションは @code{--no-dynamic} です。 これは実行時間に大きな影響を及ぼします(いくつかのプラットフォームでは約 2
倍です)が、 それでも起動速度が若干速くなります。 @code{gforth-fast -- ss-number=0 --ss-states=1
--no-dynamic -e bye} は、 約 2.6 ミリ秒のユーザー時間と 1.2 ミリ秒のシステム時間を消費します。

@c !! check
起動速度を向上させるための次のステップは、 データ再配置可能イメージ(data-relocatable
image)を使用することです(@pxref{Data-Relocatable Image Files})。 これにより、
イメージ内のコードの再配置コストが回避されます(ただし、 データの再配置コストは回避されません)。 イメージは、 使用している特定のバイナリ(つまり、
@code{gforth}、 @code{gforth-fast}、さらには特定のビルド)に固有であることに注意してください。
@code{./gforth-fast} で動作するデータ再配置可能イメージを作成するには、 @code{GFORTHD="./gforth-fast
--no-dynamic" gforthmi gforthdr.fi} とします(これには @code{--no-dynamic}
が必要です。そうしないとこのイメージは機能しません)。 そして、 @code{gforth-fast -i gforthdr.fi ... -e
bye} で実行します(上記で説明したフラグは、 再配置可能なコードでのみ機能するため、ここでは重要ではありません)。
@code{gforth-fast -i gforthdr.fi -e bye} では、 ユーザー時間は約 1.1 ミリ秒、 システム時間は約 1.2
ミリ秒かかります。

さらにもう 1 つのステップは、 再配置不可イメージ(non-relocatable image)を使用することで、
すべての再配置コストと書き換え時コピー(copy-on-write;COW)コストの一部を回避することです(@pxref{Non-Relocatable
Image Files})。ただし、 アドレス空間のランダム化が行われているオペレーティング・システム(最近の Linux 等ではこれがデフォルト)や、
その他の理由でディクショナリが移動した場合(OS カーネルの変更や、 ライブラリ更新などの場合)には機能しないという欠点があるため、
あまりお勧めできません。再配置不可イメージ(non-relocatable image)を作成するために @code{gforth-fast
--no-dynamic -e "savesystem gforthnr.fi bye"} とします(ここでも @code{--no-dynamic}
が必要です)。  そして、  @code{gforth-fast -i gforthnr.fi ... -e bye} として実行します(ここでも、
上記で説明したフラグは重要ではありません)。  @code{gforth-fast -i gforthdr.fi -e bye} はユーザー時間は約
0.9 ミリ秒、 システム時間は約 0.9 ミリ秒かかります。

実行するスクリプトに大量のコードが含まれている場合は、 起動時のコンパイルのコストを避けるために、
それをイメージにコンパイルすると有益な場合があります。

@c ******************************************************************
@node Tutorial, Introduction, Gforth Environment, Top
@chapter Forth Tutorial
@cindex Tutorial
@cindex Forth Tutorial

@c Topics from nac's Introduction that could be mentioned:
@c press <ret> after each line
@c Prompt
@c numbers vs. words in dictionary on text interpretation
@c what happens on redefinition
@c parsing words (in particular, defining words)

この章と Introduction(@pxref{Introduction}) の違いは、 このチュートリアルの方がハイペースで、 かつ、
あなたがコンピューターをさわれるときに読む必要があり、 かつ、 より多くの内容をカバーしていますが、 しかし、 Forth
システムがどのように機能するかについては説明してい無いことです。

このチュートリアルは、 標準に準拠した任意の Forth でご利用できます。 Gforth 固有の機能はすべてその旨の目印が付けられており、 別の
Forth を使用する場合はその部分はスキップできます。 このチュートリアルでは、 Forth のすべての機能について説明するわけではありませんが、
あなたが Forth を使い始めて、 Forth で使用できる機能についていくつかのアイデアを得るには十分です。 このチュートリアルが終わったら、
マニュアルの残りの部分をお読みください。

このチュートリアルの使用目的は、 あなたがコンソールの前に座って作業を進め、 例を見てその結果を予測してから、 自分で試してみるというものです。
結果が期待どおりでない場合は、 何が起こっているのかを理解できるように(類似の例を試すなどして)理由を調べます。 いくつか課題も出題してあります。

このチュートリアルでは、 あなたが以前にプログラミングをしたことがあり、 例えば、 ループとは何か、とかを理解していることを前提としています。

@c !! explain compat library

@menu
* Starting Gforth Tutorial::
* Syntax Tutorial::
* Crash Course Tutorial::
* Stack Tutorial::
* Arithmetics Tutorial::
* Stack Manipulation Tutorial::
* Using files for Forth code Tutorial::
* Comments Tutorial::
* Colon Definitions Tutorial::
* Decompilation Tutorial::
* Stack-Effect Comments Tutorial::
* Types Tutorial::
* Factoring Tutorial::
* Designing the stack effect Tutorial::
* Local Variables Tutorial::
* Conditional execution Tutorial::
* Flags and Comparisons Tutorial::
* General Loops Tutorial::
* Counted loops Tutorial::
* Recursion Tutorial::
* Leaving definitions or loops Tutorial::
* Return Stack Tutorial::
* Memory Tutorial::
* Characters and Strings Tutorial::
* Alignment Tutorial::
* Floating Point Tutorial::
* Files Tutorial::
* Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy Tutorial::
* Execution Tokens Tutorial::
* Exceptions Tutorial::
* Defining Words Tutorial::
* Arrays and Records Tutorial::
* POSTPONE Tutorial::
* Literal Tutorial::
* Advanced macros Tutorial::
* Compilation Tokens Tutorial::
* Wordlists and Search Order Tutorial::  
@end menu

@node Starting Gforth Tutorial, Syntax Tutorial, Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Starting Gforth
@cindex starting Gforth tutorial
あなたが Gforth を開始するには、その名前をタイプします:

@example
gforth
@end example

これにより、 対話モードに入ります。 @code{bye} と入力すると Gforth を終了できます。 Gforth では、 bash と同様に、
コマンド・ラインを編集し、 カーソル・キーを使用してコマンド・ライン・ヒストリ(履歴)にアクセスできます。


@node Syntax Tutorial, Crash Course Tutorial, Starting Gforth Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Syntax
@cindex syntax tutorial

@dfn{word} は、任意の文字のシーケンスです(空白(white space)を除く)。 ワードは空白(white space)で区切られます。
たとえば、 以下の各行には正確にただ 1 つのワードが含まれています:

@example
word
!@@#$%^&*()
1234567890
5!a
@end example

初心者によくある間違いは、 必要な空白を省略することです。 その結果、 @samp{Undefined word}
のようなエラーが発生します。そのため、 このようなエラーが表示された場合は、 必要な場所に空白を入れてあるかどうかを確認してください。

@example
." hello, world" \ correct
."hello, world"  \ gives an "Undefined word" error
@end example

Gforth および他のほとんどの Forth システムは、 大文字と小文字の違いを無視します(大文字と小文字は区別されません)。 つまり、
@samp{word} は @samp{Word} と同一です。 あなたのシステムで大文字と小文字が区別される場合は、
ここに示されているすべての例を大文字で入力する必要がある場合があります。


@node Crash Course Tutorial, Stack Tutorial, Syntax Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Crash Course

Forth は、 自分の足を撃つような馬鹿げた事を妨げたりはしません。 以下のように Gforth をクラッシュさせるいくつかの方法を試してみましょう:

@example
0 0 !
here execute
' catch >body 20 erase abort
' (quit1) >body 20 erase
@end example

最後の 2 つの例は、Gforth (および他のほとんどのシステム) の重要な部分を破壊することが保証されているため、 (Gforth
が自動的に終了していない場合、) この後は Gforth を終了させたほうがよいでしょう。 一部のシステムでは、 外部から gforth
を強制終了する必要がある場合があります(例: Unix系 では @code{kill} を使用します)。

これらの行が何を行うのか、 なぜクラッシュが発生するのかは後ほど分かります。

クラッシュを発生させる方法がわかったので(そして、 それは大したことがない事がわかったので)、
今度は意味のあるプログラムを作成する方法を学ぶとしましょう。


@node Stack Tutorial, Arithmetics Tutorial, Crash Course Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Stack
@cindex stack tutorial

Forth の最も明々白々な機能はスタックです。 数値を入力すると、 その数値がスタックにプッシュされます。 @code{.s}
を使用してスタックの内容を表示できます。

@example
1 2 .s
3 .s
@end example

@code{.s} はスタックの最上位(top-of-stack)が一番右になるように表示します。 つまり、 数値は入力時に表記されたとおりに
@code{.s} 出力に表れます。

@code{.} を使用してスタックの最上位要素を出力できます。

@example
1 2 3 . . .
@end example

一般に、 ワードはスタック引数を消費します(@code{.s} は例外です)。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{5 6 7 .} の後、 スタックには何が含まれていますか？
@end quotation


@node Arithmetics Tutorial, Stack Manipulation Tutorial, Stack Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Arithmetics
@cindex arithmetics tutorial

@code{+} や @code{-} や @code{*} や @code{/} や @code{mod} というワードは、 常に頂上から見て 2
つのスタック項目に作用します:

@example
2 2 .s
+ .s
.
2 1 - .
7 3 mod .
@end example

@code{-} や @code{/} や @code{mod} のオペランドは、 対応する中置式と同じ順序になります(これが Forth
における一般的なケースです)。

ワードの順序によって評価の順序とオペランドが明確に決定されるため、 括弧は不要です(そして、 括弧は使用不可です):

@example
3 4 + 5 * .
3 4 5 * + .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
上記の Forth コードに対応する中置式はどうなるでしょうか？ また、 @code{6-7*8+9} を Forth
表記で記述してください@footnote{この表記法は、 後値記法(postfix notation) または RPN (逆ポーランド記法)
と呼ばれます。}。
@end quotation

符号を変更するには、 以下のように @code{negate} を使用します:

@example
2 negate .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
`-(-3)*4-5` を Forth に変換してみましょう。
@end quotation

@code{/mod} は @code{/} と @code{mod} の両方を実行します。

@example
7 3 /mod . .
@end example

詳しくはこちらを参照ください: @ref{Arithmetic}


@node Stack Manipulation Tutorial, Using files for Forth code Tutorial, Arithmetics Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Stack Manipulation
@cindex stack manipulation tutorial

スタック操作ワードはスタックのデータを並べ替えます。

@example
1 .s drop .s
1 .s dup .s drop drop .s
1 2 .s over .s drop drop drop
1 2 .s swap .s drop drop
1 2 3 .s rot .s drop drop drop
@end example

上記は最も重要なスタック操作ワードです。 以下のように2つペアでスタック項目を操作する亜種もあります:

@example
1 2 3 4 .s 2swap .s 2drop 2drop
@end example

さらに 2 つ、 以下のスタック操作ワードがあります:

@example
1 2 .s nip .s drop
1 2 .s tuck .s 2drop drop
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{nip} と @code{tuck} を他のスタック操作ワードの組み合わせに置き換えてみましょう。

@example
以下の結果になるスタック操作を考えてみましょう
Given:          How do you get:
1 2 3           3 2 1
1 2 3           1 2 3 2
1 2 3           1 2 3 3
1 2 3           1 3 3
1 2 3           2 1 3
1 2 3 4         4 3 2 1
1 2 3           1 2 3 1 2 3
1 2 3 4         1 2 3 4 1 2
1 2 3
1 2 3           1 2 3 4
1 2 3           1 3
@end example
@end quotation

@example
5 dup * . \ 5^2
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{17} を複数回書かずに、 Forth で 17^3 と 17^4 を書いてみましょう。 また、 スタック上の 2 つの数値
(@var{a} と @var{b}、 スタック頂上を @var{b} とする) を想定し、@code{(a-b)(a+1)} を計算する Forth
コードを作成してみましょう。 
@end quotation

こちらも参照してください: @ref{Stack Manipulation}


@node Using files for Forth code Tutorial, Comments Tutorial, Stack Manipulation Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Using files for Forth code
@cindex loading Forth code, tutorial
@cindex files containing Forth code, tutorial

Forth コマンド・ラインでの作業は、 1 行の例や短い 1 回限りのコードの場合には便利ですが、 あなたは編集や永続化に便利なように、
ソース・コードをファイルに保存したいと思うかもしれません。 お気に入りのエディター(なお、 Gforth には Emacs サポートがあります
@pxref{Emacs and Gforth})を使用して @var{file.fs} を作成し以下のようにします

@example
s" @var{file.fs}" included
@end example

こうすると、 @var{file.fs} ファイルを Forth システムにロードします。 私達は Forth ファイルの拡張子には
@samp{.fs} を使っています。

以下のようにいくつかのファイルをロードして、 Gforth を簡単に開始できます:

@example
gforth @var{file1.fs} @var{file2.fs}
@end example

これらのファイルのロード中にエラーが発生した場合、 Gforth は終了(terminate)しますが、 Gforth 内で
@code{INCLUDED} 中にエラーが発生すると、 通常は Gforth コマンド・ラインになります。 Forth システムを毎回開始させれば、
あなたの以前の試行の結果に影響されることなく、 毎回クリーンな開始が可能になります。

私達は多くの場合、 すべてのテストをファイルに入れて、 それからそのコードをロードし以下のようにしてテストを実行します

@example
gforth @var{code.fs} @var{tests.fs} -e bye
@end example

(多くの場合、 Emacs内 で @kbd{C-x C-e} を使用してこのコマンドを実行します。) @code{-e bye} により、 テスト後に
Gforth が確実に終了(terminate)するので、 面倒なくこのコマンドを再度開始できます。

このアプローチの利点は、 プログラムが変更されるたびにテストを簡単に繰り返すことができ、 変更によって生じたバグを簡単に発見できることです。

こちらも参照してください: @ref{Forth source files}


@node Comments Tutorial, Colon Definitions Tutorial, Using files for Forth code Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Comments
@cindex comments tutorial

@example
\ これはコメントです。これは行末で終わります
( もう一つのコメント。 これはこのように閉じ丸括弧で終わります: )  .s
@end example

@code{\} と @code{(} は通常の Forth ワードであるため、 その後ろのテキストと空白(white
space)で区切る必要があります。

@example
\This gives an "Undefined word" error
@end example

最初にあらわれる @code{)} が @code{(} で始まるコメントを終了するため、 「@code{(}
型のコメント」を入れ子(nest)にすることはできません。 そして、 @code{( ... )} を使用して @code{)}
を含むテキストをコメントアウトすることはできません@footnote{したがって、 ワード名には @code{)} を使用しないことをお勧めします。}。

私達は、 説明テキストや、 1 行以上のコードのコメントアウトに @code{\} コメントを使用します。 @code{(} コメントは、
スタック効果やスタックの内容を説明したり、 コードの下位部分をコメントアウトしたりするために使用します。

Emacs モード @file{gforth.el} (@pxref{Emacs and Gforth}) は、 @kbd{C-x \}
でリージョンをコメントアウトし、 @kbd{C-u C-x \} でリージョンのコメントを解除し、 @code{\} でコメントされた領域を
@kbd{M-q} でフィル(fill)します。

こちらも参照してください: @ref{Comments}


@node Colon Definitions Tutorial, Decompilation Tutorial, Comments Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Colon Definitions
@cindex colon definitions, tutorial
@cindex definitions, tutorial
@cindex procedures, tutorial
@cindex functions, tutorial

コロン定義(Colon Definitions)は、 他のプログラミング言語のプロシージャや関数に似ています。

@example
: squared ( n -- n^2 )
   dup * ;
5 squared .
7 squared .
@end example

@code{:} はコロン定義を開始します。 その名前は @code{squared} です。 それに続くコメントは、
そのスタック効果について説明しています。  @code{dup *} というワードは実行はされませんが、 定義にコンパイルされます(compiled
into the definition)。 @code{;} はコロン定義を終了します。

新しく定義されたワードは、 他の定義での使用を含め、 他のワードと同様に使用できます:

@example
: cubed ( n -- n^3 )
   dup squared * ;
-5 cubed .
: fourth-power ( n -- n^4 )
   squared squared ;
3 fourth-power .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{nip} や @code{tuck} や @code{negate} や @code{/mod} のコロン定義を他の Forth
ワードで記述し、 それらが機能するかどうかを確認してみましょう (ヒント:
最初にオリジナルであなたの作成したテストコードをテストして結果を確認してから、 その後あなたが定義して、 再度テストして結果を比較しましょう)。
@samp{redefine} メッセージに驚かないでください。 これらは単なる警告です。 (訳注: redefine;
同じ名前のワードを定義したという警告。 置き換えではなく追加となる。 これ以降の解釈(interpret)・コンパイルは新しい方のワードを参照するが、
通常は新しい方のワード定義後も、 既にコンパイル済みのワードは古い方のワードを参照しつづける。 詳しくはディクショナリ等の項目を参照)
@end quotation

こちらも参照してください: @ref{Colon Definitions}


@node Decompilation Tutorial, Stack-Effect Comments Tutorial, Colon Definitions Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Decompilation
@cindex decompilation tutorial
@cindex see tutorial

@code{see}: を使用してコロン定義を逆コンパイルできます:

@example
see squared
see cubed
@end example

Gforth では、 @code{see} は実行可能コードからソース・コードを再構築したものを示します。 ソースには存在するが、
実行可能コードには存在しない情報(コメントなど)は失われます。

最初から義済みのワードを逆コンパイルすることもできます:

@example
see .
see +
@end example


@node Stack-Effect Comments Tutorial, Types Tutorial, Decompilation Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Stack-Effect Comments
@cindex stack-effect comments, tutorial
@cindex --, tutorial
慣例により、 定義名の後のコメントはスタック効果を説明します。 @samp{--} の前の部分は、 定義の実行前のスタックの状態、
つまりコロン定義に渡されるパラメータを説明します。 @samp{--} の後ろの部分は、 定義の実行後のスタックの状態、 つまり定義の実行結果です。
スタック・コメントには、 定義がアクセス、 または、変更する、 (訳注: 定義の外部から見える、 )スタック項目のみを記述します。

たとえ スタック効果が @code{( -- )} (訳注: スタックに何の効果も及ぼさない)であっても、 あなたは、
すべての定義に正しいスタック効果を記述するべきです。 また、 より複雑なワードには説明的なコメントを追加する必要があります(通常、 これは
@code{:} の後ろに続けます)。 これを行わないと、 あなたコードの行動は解読不能になります(なぜなら、 とある定義を理解するためには、
全ての定義を辿るハメになるから)。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
例えば @code{swap} のスタック効果は、 @code{x1 x2 -- x2 x1} のように記述できます。 同様に、 @code{-} や
@code{drop} や @code{dup} や @code{over} や @code{rot} や @code{nip} や
@code{tuck} のスタック効果を書いてみましょう。 ヒント: 書けたら、
このマニュアルに書いてあるスタック効果と合っているかどうかチェックしましょう(@pxref{Word Index})。
@end quotation

プログラマーは、 コロン定義内のさまざまな場所に、 その場所のスタックの内容を説明するコメント(スタック・コメント)を挿入することがあります。 つまり、
スタック効果コメントの最初の部分のようなものです。 例えば以下のようなのです

@example
: cubed ( n -- n^3 )
   dup squared  ( n n^2 ) * ;
@end example

この場合、 ワードが十分に単純であるため、 スタック・コメントは割と余計です。 あなたが、
読みやすさを高めるためにそのようなコメントを追加することが良いと思った場合、
ワードをいくつかの単純なワードにファクタリング(因数分解)することも検討する必要があります(@pxref{Factoring Tutorial,,
Factoring})。 ファクタリングにより、 通常はスタック・コメントが不要になります。 ただし、
あなたが結果としてリファクタリングしないことに決めた場合は、 そのようなコメントがある方が、 無いよりも良いです。

標準や、 このマニュアルや、 多くのプログラムの、 スタック効果およびスタック・コメント内のスタック項目の名前は、 Fortran
やハンガリアン記法と同様に、 型プレフィックスによって型を指定します。 最も頻繁に使用されるプレフィックスは以下のとおりです:

@table @code
@item n
符号付き整数
@item u
符号なし整数
@item c
文字(character)
@item f
二値フラグ(Boolean flags)。 つまり @code{false} または @code{true}
@item a-addr,a-
セル揃えアドレス(Cell-aligned address)
@item c-addr,c-
文字揃えアドレス(Char-aligned address)(注意: NTWindows NT では 文字(char) は 2
バイトになる場合があることに注意)
@item xt
実行トークン(Execution token)。 セルと同一サイズ
@item w,x
セル(cell)。 セルには整数またはアドレスを含めることができます。 通常は 32ビットまたは 64 ビットまたは 16
ビットを必要とします(プラットフォームと Forth システムによって異なります)。 cell は一般には machine word
として知られていますが、 Forth では @emph{word} という用語はすでに別の意味を持っています。
@item d
符号付き2倍長整数(signed double-cell integer)
@item ud
符号無し2倍長整数(unsigned double-cell integer)
@item r
浮動小数点数(Float)(FP スタック上に置かれる)
@end table

より完全なリストは @ref{Notation} にあります。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
あなたがここまでで記述したすべての定義に対してスタック効果コメントを記述してみましょう。
@end quotation


@node Types Tutorial, Factoring Tutorial, Stack-Effect Comments Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Types
@cindex types tutorial

Forth では、 演算子の名前はオーバーロードされません。 したがって、 異なる型に対する同様の演算には異なる名前が必要です。 たとえば、
@code{+} は整数の加算をしますが、 浮動小数点数を加算するには @code{f+} を使用する必要があります。 以下のプレフィックスは、
さまざまな型の関連する演算によく使用されます:

@table @code
@item (none)
符号付き整数
@item u
符号なし整数
@item c
文字(character)
@item d
符号付き2倍長整数(signed double-cell integer)
@item ud, du
符号無し2倍長整数(unsigned double-cell integer)
@item 2
2 つのセル(必ずしも 2倍長整数(double-cell numbers)とは限りません)
@item m, um
単一セルとダブル・セルの混合操作
@item f
浮動小数点(注意: スタック・コメントでは、 @samp{f} はフラグを表し、 @samp{r} は FP 数値を表すことに注意してください。 また、
リテラル FP 数値には指数部分を含める必要があります @pxref{Floating Point Tutorial})。
@end table

符号付きのバリエーションと符号なしのバリエーションに違いがない場合(例えば @code{+} の場合)、
プレフィックスのないバリエーションのみが存在します。

Forth は、 コンパイル時も実行時も型チェックを実行しません。 以下のように間違った演算子を使うと、
データが正しく解釈(interpret)されません:

@example
-1 u.
@end example

あなたが、 これまで型チェック言語しか使用したことがなく、 型チェックがいかに重要であるかを聞いたことがある場合でも、 パニックに陥る必要はありません。
著者の経験(および他の Forth 利用者(Forthers)の経験)では、 Forth コードの型エラーは通常(慣れてしまえば)簡単に見つかります。
プログラマの警戒心が高まると、 ほとんどの型エラーに加えて、 より困難なエラーも発見される傾向があります。 型システムを回避する必要がまったくないため、
ほとんどの状況では型チェックがないことが利点であるようです(Forth に型チェックを追加するプロジェクトは普及していません)。


@node Factoring Tutorial, Designing the stack effect Tutorial, Types Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Factoring
@cindex factoring tutorial

あなたが長ったらしい定義を書こうとすると、 スタックの内容を追跡するのがすぐに困難になることがわかります。 したがって、優れた Forth
プログラマは短い定義 (たとえば 3 行)のみを記述する傾向があります。 意味のある短い定義を見つける技術は、 (多項式の因数分解(factoring
polynomials)と同様に)ファクタリング(factoring)として知られています。

よくファクタリングされたプログラムには、 追加の利点もあります。 つまり、小さくて一般的なワードは、
大きくて特殊なワードよりもテストとデバッグが容易で、より再利用性に富みます。

したがって、 あなたが、 スタック管理に問題を抱えてるなら、 コードを記述するときにワードに意味のある要素を定義し、
それらの観点からワードを定義するようにしてください。 たった 2 つのワードしかしか含まれないような定義でも、 多くの場合役に立ちます。

上手なファクタリングは簡単ではなく、 コツを掴むにはある程度の練習が必要です。 しかし、経験豊富な Forth プログラマーであっても、
すぐには適切な解決策を見つけられないことが多く、 プログラムの書き直し時に見つかるのです。 したがって、 すぐに良い解決策が思い浮かばなくても、
絶望しないで試し続けてください。(訳注: 参考: 拙訳 Thinking Forth 第6章 ファクタリング
https://thinking-forth-ja.readthedocs.io/ja/latest/chapter6.html)

@c example !!


@node Designing the stack effect Tutorial, Local Variables Tutorial, Factoring Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Designing the stack effect
@cindex Stack effect design, tutorial
@cindex design of stack effects, tutorial

他の言語では、 関数(function)のパラメータに任意の順序を使用できます。 また、 結果は 1 つだけなので、 結果の順序を扱う必要もありません。

Forth (および他のスタック・ベースの言語、 たとえば PostScript)では、 定義のパラメーターの順序と結果の順序が重要であり、
適切に設計する必要があります。 一般的なガイドラインは、 ワードの実装が複雑になる場合でも、
ワードがほとんどの場合に簡単に使用できるようにスタック効果を設計することです。 いくつかの具体的なルールは以下のとおりです:

@itemize @bullet

@item
ワードがパラメータの全てを消費する(例: @code{.})。

@item
パラメータの順序に関する慣習がある場合(数学や他のプログラミング言語など)、 それに従ってください(例: @code{-})。

@item
1 つのパラメータが通常短い計算のみを必要とする場合(たとえば、それが定数である場合)、 それをスタック頂上(top of
stack;TOS)に渡します。 逆に、 通常、 計算に長いコード シーケンスが必要なパラメータは、 スタック底(bottom) (つまり、最初の)
パラメータとして渡す必要があります。 これにより、 リーダーはコードの長いシーケンス(またはスタック操作)を通じてスタック底の項目(bottom
item)を追跡する必要がなくなるため、 コードが読みやすくなります。 たとえば、 @code{!}(「ストア」 @pxref{Memory})は、
通常、 格納されている値よりも計算が簡単であるため、 スタック頂上にアドレスがあるのを期待します(多くの場合、 アドレスは単なる変数です)。

@item
同様に、 通常すぐに消費される結果はスタック頂上(top of stack)に返されるべきですが、
長い計算でよく使用される結果はスタック底(bottom)の結果として渡される必要があります。 たとえば、 @code{open-file}
のようなファイル・ワードは、スタック頂上にエラー・コードを返します。 これは、 通常、 @code{throw} によってすぐに消費されるためです。
さらに言えば、 他の結果に対して何かを行う前に、 エラー・コードをチェックする必要があります。

@end itemize

これらのルールは一般的なガイドラインに過ぎません。 ワードを使いやすくするという全体的な目標を見失わないでください。 例えば、
慣習のルールが計算長のルールと衝突する場合、 ワードがあまり使われない場合は慣習を優先するかもしれません。 一方、 ワードが頻繁に使われる場合は、
計算長のルールを優先するかもしれません(だからといって頻繁に使うと、 計算長のルールを破るコストが非常に高くなりますし、
頻繁に使うことで非慣習的な順序を覚えてしまいがちになります)。

@c example !! structure package


@node Local Variables Tutorial, Conditional execution Tutorial, Designing the stack effect Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Local Variables
@cindex local variables, tutorial

コロン定義内でローカル変数(ローカルズ(locals))を定義できます:

@example
: swap @{ a b -- b a @}
  b a ;
1 2 swap .s 2drop
@end example

(あなたの Forth システムがこの構文をサポートしていない場合は、  最初に @file{compat/anslocal.fs}
をインクルードしてください)

この例では、 @code{@{ a b -- b a @}} がローカルズ定義です。 スタックから 2 つのセルを取得し、 スタック頂上を
@code{b} に入れ、 その次のスタック要素を @code{a} に入れます(訳注: a b はスタック上から取り除かれる)。 @code{--}
は @code{@}} で終わるコメントを開始します。 ローカルズの定義後、 ローカルズの名前を使用すると、 その値がスタックに積まれます。
コメント部分(@code{-- b a})は省略できます:

@example
: swap ( x1 x2 -- x2 x1 )
  @{ a b @} b a ;
@end example

Gforth では、 コロン定義内の任意の場所に複数のローカルズ定義を含めることができます。 対照的に、 標準Forthのプログラムでは、
コロン定義ごとにローカルズ定義を 1 つだけしか持つことができず、 そのローカルズ定義は制御構造の外側にある必要があります。

ローカルズを使用すると、 スタックの問題に遭遇することなく、 少し長い定義を書くことができます。
ただし、重要な、ファクタリング技能を身につけるための演習として、 ローカルズを使用せずにコロン定義を記述してみることをお勧めします。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
ここまでのあなたの定義をローカルズを使って書き換えてみましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照下さい: @ref{Locals}


@node Conditional execution Tutorial, Flags and Comparisons Tutorial, Local Variables Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Conditional execution
@cindex conditionals, tutorial
@cindex if, tutorial

Forth では、 コロン定義内でのみ制御構造を使用できます。 @code{if} 構造は以下のようになります:

@example
: abs ( n1 -- +n2 )
    dup 0 < if
        negate
    endif ;
5 abs .
-5 abs .
@end example

@code{if} はスタックからフラグを取得します。 フラグがゼロ以外 (true) の場合は、 その次のコードが実行されます。 そうでない場合は、
@code{endif} (または @code{else}) の後から実行が続けられます。 @code{<} は、 頂上から 2
つのスタック要素を比較し、 フラグを生成します。

@example
1 2 < .
2 1 < .
1 1 < .
@end example

実は、 @code{endif} の標準Forthでの名前は @code{then} です。 このチュートリアルでは、 @code{endif}
を使用した例を示します。 なぜなら、 @code{then} が異なる意味を持つ他のプログラミング言語に慣れている人々にとっては、
@code{endif} を使用する方が混乱が少ないからです。 システムに @code{endif} がない場合は、 以下のように定義します

@example
: endif postpone then ; immediate
@end example

あなたはオプションで @code{else} 部分を使用できます:

@example
: min ( n1 n2 -- n )
  2dup < if
    drop
  else
    nip
  endif ;
2 3 min .
3 2 min .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{else} 部分を付けずに @code{min} を記述してみましょう。 (ヒント: @code{nip} の定義は何ですか?)。
@end quotation

こちらも参照下さい: @ref{Selection}


@node Flags and Comparisons Tutorial, General Loops Tutorial, Conditional execution Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Flags and Comparisons
@cindex flags tutorial
@cindex comparison tutorial

false フラグはすべてのビットがクリアです(整数として解釈(interpret)される場合は 0)。 正規化された true フラグは、
すべてのビットがセットされています(2の補数の符号付き整数として -1)。 多くの文脈(例: @code{if})では、ゼロ以外の値はすべて true
フラグとして扱われます。

@example
false .
true .
true hex u. decimal
@end example

比較ワードは正規化フラグを生成します:

@example
1 1 = .
1 0= .
0 1 < .
0 0 < .
-1 1 u< . \ 型エラー。 u< は -1 を 大きな符号なし数として扱ってしまいます
-1 1 < .
@end example

Gforth は、接頭辞 @code{0 u d d0 du f f0} (または「 接頭辞なし」)との比較 @code{= <> < > <= >=}
のすべての組み合わせをサポートします。 これらの組み合わせの一部のみが標準Forthです (詳細については、標準Forth または
@ref{Numeric comparison} または @ref{Floating Point} または @ref{Word Index}
を参照してください)。

@code{and or xor invert} を正規化フラグ用の演算子として使用できます。 実際には、 これらはビット単位演算です:

@example
1 2 and .
1 2 or .
1 3 xor .
1 invert .
@end example

@code{0<>} を使用して ゼロ/非ゼロ フラグを正規化フラグに変換できます(そして、 その途中で @code{0=} を使用して ゼロ/非ゼロ
フラグの余数(complement)を取ります。 実際、 正規化フラグでは @code{invert} の代わりに @code{0=}
を使用するのが一般的です)。

@example
1 0= .
1 0<> .
@end example

@code{0<>} 無しでも @code{if} で ゼロ/非ゼロ をテストすることはできますが、 ゼロ/非ゼロ 値を @code{and or
xor} と組み合わせる場合、 @code{and or xor} はビット単位での操作なので、 @code{0<>}
を使用する必要がある場合があります。 最も単純で、 エラーが少なく、 おそらく最も明確な方法は、 これらすべての場合に @code{0<>}
を使用することですが、 場合によっては、 使用する @code{0<>} の数を減らすこともできます。 以下にいくつかのスタック効果を示します。
@i{fc} は正規化フラグ(canonical flag)を表し、 @i{fz} は ゼロ/非ゼロ を表します(すべての @i{fc} は
@i{fz} としても機能します):

@example
or  ( fz1 fz2 -- fz3 )
and ( fz1 fc  -- fz2 )
and ( fc  fz1 -- fz2 )
@end example

したがって、 以下のようなコードの場合:

@example
( n1 n2 ) 0<> and if
@end example

これは、 n1 and n2 (n1 かつ n2)がゼロ以外であるかどうかをテストし、 イエスの場合は @code{if} の後のコードを実行します。
n1 を ゼロ/非ゼロ として扱い、 @code{0<>} を使用して n2 を正規化フラグに変換します。 @code{and} は fz を生成し、
それは @code{if} によって消費されます。

正規化フラグの全ビットセット機能とブール演算のビット単位の演算を使用して、 @code{if} を回避することもできます:

@example
: foo ( n1 -- n2 )
  0= if
    14
  else
    0
  endif ;
0 foo .
1 foo .

: foo ( n1 -- n2 )
  0= 14 and ;
0 foo .
1 foo .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{min} を @code{if} 無しで書いてみましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照下さい: @ref{Boolean Flags}, @ref{Numeric comparison}, @ref{Bitwise
operations}


@node General Loops Tutorial, Counted loops Tutorial, Flags and Comparisons Tutorial, Tutorial
@section General Loops
@cindex loops, indefinite, tutorial

無限ループは非常に単純です:

@example
: endless ( -- )
  0 begin
    dup . 1+
  again ;
endless
@end example

(Gforth の場合、) @kbd{Ctrl-C} を押してこのループを終了します。  @code{begin} は実行時に何も行わず、
@code{again} は @code{begin} にジャンプします。

任意の場所に 1 つの出口があるループは以下のようになります:

@example
: log2 ( +n1 -- n2 )
\ logarithmus dualis of n1>0, rounded down to the next integer
  assert( dup 0> )
  2/ 0 begin
    over 0> while
      1+ swap 2/ swap
  repeat
  nip ;
7 log2 .
8 log2 .
@end example

実行時には @code{while} はフラグを1つ消費します。 フラグが 0 の場合、 @code{repeat} の後ろへ飛んで実行が継続されます。
フラグがゼロ以外の場合、 実行は @code{while} の後ろから継続されます。 @code{Repeat} は、 @code{again}
と全く同じように、  @code{begin} に戻ります。

Forth には、 @code{1+} など、多数の 組み合わせ/省略形 があります。 しかし、 @code{2/} は 組み合わせ/省略形
ではありません。 これは引数を 1 ビット右にシフトし、 Gforth の (Gforth 0.7 以降の) @code{/} と同様、
常に負の無限大方向に向かって小数点以下を丸める除算(フロア除算)と見なされますが、 他の多くの Forth システムの @code{/}
とは異なります。

@example
-5 2 / . \ -2 or -3
-5 2/ .  \ -3
@end example

@code{assert(} は標準Forthのワードではありませんが、 Gforth 以外のシステムでも
@file{compat/assert.fs} を含めることで取得できます。 それが何をするかは、 以下のように試してみることで確認できます。

@example
0 log2 .
@end example

以下は、 最後に出口があるループです:

@example
: log2 ( +n1 -- n2 )
\ logarithmus dualis of n1>0, rounded down to the next integer
  assert( dup 0 > )
  -1 begin
    1+ swap 2/ swap
    over 0 <=
  until
  nip ;
@end example

@code{Until} はフラグを消費します。 フラグがゼロの場合は @code{begin} から実行が継続され、 それ以外の場合は
@code{until} の後から実行が継続されます。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
最大公約数を計算する定義を書いてみましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Simple Loops}


@node Counted loops Tutorial, Recursion Tutorial, General Loops Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Counted loops
@cindex loops, counted, tutorial

@example
: ^ ( n1 u -- n )
\ n = the uth power of n1
  1 swap 0 u+do
    over *
  loop
  nip ;
3 2 ^ .
4 3 ^ .
@end example

@code{U+do} (あなたの Forth システムにない場合は @file{compat/loops.fs} をインクルードしてください)は、
@code{( u3 u4 -- )} 、 つまり、 スタックから 2 つの数値を取得し、 @code{u+do} と @code{loop}
の間のコードを @code{u3 - u4} 回実行します(@code{ u3 - u4 < 0} の場合はまったく実行しません)。

ループ開始ワードのスタック効果を見れば、スタック効果の設計ルールが機能していることがわかります。
ループの開始値は終了値と比べて定数であることが多いため、 開始値はスタック頂上(top-of-stack)に渡されます。

@code{i} を使用して、 ループ・カウンターにアクセスできます:

@example
: fac ( u -- u! )
  1 swap 1+ 1 u+do
    i *
  loop ;
5 fac .
7 fac .
@end example

@code{+do} もあります。 これは符号付きの数値を期待します(それはループに入るかどうかを決定するために重要です)。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
n 番目のフィボナッチ数を計算するための定義を記述してみましょう。
@end quotation

増分として 1 以外も使用できます:

@example
: up2 ( n1 n2 -- )
  +do
    i .
  2 +loop ;
10 0 up2

: down2 ( n1 n2 -- )
  -do
    i .
  2 -loop ;
0 10 down2
@end example

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Counted Loops}


@node Recursion Tutorial, Leaving definitions or loops Tutorial, Counted loops Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Recursion
@cindex recursion tutorial

通常、 定義の名前はその定義内に表れません。ただし、 それ以前の(同名の)定義は普通に表れます(訳注: 下記例は再帰呼出しではなくて、 '/'
の古いバージョンを呼び出しているに過ぎない事に注意。同じ名前の古いバージョンが存在しなければエラーになるが、存在すればエラーにならないので注意。):

@example
1 0 / . \ "Floating-point unidentified fault" in Gforth on some platforms
: / ( n1 n2 -- n )
  dup 0= if
    -10 throw \ report division by zero
  endif
  /           \ old version
;
1 0 /
@end example

再帰定義の場合は、 @code{recursive} (非標準) または @code{recurse} を使用できます:

@example
: fac1 ( n -- n! ) recursive
 dup 0> if
   dup 1- fac1 *
 else
   drop 1
 endif ;
7 fac1 .

: fac2 ( n -- n! )
 dup 0> if
   dup 1- recurse *
 else
   drop 1
 endif ;
8 fac2 .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
n 番目のフィボナッチ数を計算するための再帰定義を記述してみましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください (間接再帰に関してもコチラ): @xref{Calls and returns}


@node Leaving definitions or loops Tutorial, Return Stack Tutorial, Recursion Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Leaving definitions or loops
@cindex leaving definitions, tutorial
@cindex leaving loops, tutorial

@code{EXIT} は、 現在の定義をすぐに終了(exit)します。 @code{EXIT} の実行前に、
(残ったループ・カウンタ達を全て取り除くために、)ネストしたカウンタ付きループの数だけ @code{UNLOOP} を実行する必要があります(訳注:
下記例は1重のループなので unloop が1つ。 2重ループになったら unloop unloop と2つ必要):

@c !! real examples
@example
: ...
 ... u+do
   ... if
     ... unloop exit
   endif
   ...
 loop
 ... ;
@end example

@code{LEAVE} は、 (@code{LEAVE} から見て)最も内側にあるカウンタ付きループを直ちに終了します:

@example
: ...
 ... u+do
   ... if
     ... leave
   endif
   ...
 loop
 ... ;
@end example

@c !! example

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Calls and returns}, @ref{Counted Loops}


@node Return Stack Tutorial, Memory Tutorial, Leaving definitions or loops Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Return Stack
@cindex return stack tutorial

データ・スタックに加えて、 Forth には 2 番目のスタックであるリターン・スタックもあります。 ほとんどの Forth
システムは、プロシージャ呼び出しの戻りアドレスをそこに保存します(したがって、 リターン・スタックという名前が付けられています)。
プログラマもリターン・スタックを利用することができます。

@example
: foo ( n1 n2 -- )
 .s
 >r .s
 r@@ .
 >r .s
 r@@ .
 r> .
 r@@ .
 r> . ;
1 2 foo
@end example

@code{>r} はデータ・スタックから1つの要素を取得し、 それをリターン・スタックにプッシュします。 逆に、 @code{r>}
は1つの要素をリターンからデータ・スタックに移動します。 @code{r@@} は、リターン・スタック頂上のコピーをデータ・スタックにプッシュします。

Forth プログラマーは通常、 データ・スタックのみを使用すると複雑すぎて、 かつ、 ファクタリングやローカルが選択肢に無い場合、
データを一時的に保存するためにリターン・スタックを使用します。

@example
: 2swap ( x1 x2 x3 x4 -- x3 x4 x1 x2 )
 rot >r rot r> ;
@end example

定義のリターン・アドレスとカウント付きループのループ制御パラメータは通常、 リターン・スタック上に存在するため、
コロン定義またはカウント付きループでリターン
スタックにプッシュしたすべての項目を、定義の終了やループの終了の前にリターン・スタックから取得する必要があります。
ある定義の外側やループの外側でリターン・スタックにプッシュしたアイテムに、 ループの定義内からアクセスすることはできません。

リターン・スタック項目の数を間違えると、 通常はクラッシュします:

@example
: crash ( n -- )
  >r ;
5 crash
@end example

ローカルの使用とリターン・スタックの使用を混在させることはできません(標準Forthの場合。 Gforth では問題ありません)。 ただし、
これらは同一の問題の解決なので、 問題にはなりません。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
リターン・スタックを使用して、 ここまでにあなたが書いた定義をより良い方法で書き直すことができるでしょうか？
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Return stack}


@node Memory Tutorial, Characters and Strings Tutorial, Return Stack Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Memory
@cindex memory access/allocation tutorial

以下使用してグローバル変数 @code{v} を作成できます:

@example
variable v ( -- addr )
@end example

@code{v} は、スタックにメモリ内の、とあるセルのアドレスをプッシュします。 このセルは @code{variable}
によって予約されています。 @code{!}(ストア)を使用してスタックからこのセルに値を保存し、
@code{@@}(フェッチ)を使用して値をメモリからスタックにロードできます:

@example
v .
5 v ! .s
v @@ .
@end example

@code{dump} を使用すると、 メモリの生のダンプ(メモリー・ダンプ)を確認できます:

@example
v 1 cells .s dump
@end example

@code{Cells ( n1 -- n2 )} は、 n1 個のセル が占めるバイト数(より一般的にはアドレス単位(address
units)(aus))を与えます。 そして、 あなたは、 さらに多くのメモリを予約することもできます:

@example
create v2 20 cells allot
v2 20 cells dump
@end example

変数のようなワード @code{v2} を作成し、 20 個の初期化されていないセルを予約します。 @code{v2}
によってプッシュされたアドレスは、 これら 20 個のセルの先頭を指します(@pxref{CREATE})。 あなたは、 アドレス演算を使用して、
これらのセルにアクセスできます:

@example
3 v2 5 cells + !
v2 20 cells dump
@end example

@code{,} を使用してメモリを予約 かつ 初期化できます:

@example
create v3
  5 , 4 , 3 , 2 , 1 ,
v3 @@ .
v3 cell+ @@ .
v3 2 cells + @@ .
v3 5 cells dump
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
最初のセルは @code{addr} 、 次のセルは @code{addr cell+} などとして、 @code{u}
個のセルの値の合計を計算する定義 @code{vsum ( addr u -- n )} を記述してみましょう。
@end quotation

@code{variable} と @code{create} の違いは、@code{variable} がセルを割り当てる(allots)ことと、
標準 Forth では変数(variable)に追加のメモリを割り当てることができないことです。

新しいワードを作成せずにメモリを予約することもできます:

@example
here 10 cells allot .
here .
@end example

最初の @code{here} は(最初の @code{here} 時点の)ディクショナリ領域の後のアドレスをプッシュし、
メモリ領域の開始アドレスとして使い、 2 番目の @code{here} は(2 番目の @code{here}
時点の)ディクショナリ領域の後のアドレスをプッシュします。 この開始アドレスはどこかに保存する必要があります。 そうしないと、
あなたはこのメモリ領域を再度見つけるのが困難になります。

@code{Allot} はディクショナリ・メモリを管理します。 ディクショナリ・メモリには、 Gforth や他のほとんどの Forth システムの、
ワードなどのシステムのデータ構造が含まれています。 これはスタックのように管理されます。
あなたは以下のようにして割り当て(@code{allot})したメモリを解放できます:

@example
-10 cells allot
here .
@end example

注意: その合間に新しいワードを作成した場合、 それを実行できないことに注意してください(@code{allot} で作成されたメモリが、
もはやディクショナリ「スタック」の頂上ではなくなるため)。

その代わりに、 @code{allocate} や @code{free} を使用すると、 任意の順序でメモリを解放できます:

@example
10 cells allocate throw .s
20 cells allocate throw .s
swap
free throw
free throw
@end example

@code{throw} はエラー(メモリ不足など)を処理します。

また、 @uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/garbage-collection.zip,
ガベージ・コレクター} なら、 メモリを明示的に解放(@code{free})する必要がなくなります。

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Memory}


@node Characters and Strings Tutorial, Alignment Tutorial, Memory Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Characters and Strings
@cindex strings tutorial
@cindex characters tutorial

スタック上では、 数と同様に文字がセルを占めます。 メモリ内では文字は独自のサイズ(ほとんどのシステムでは 8 ビットのバイト値)であるため、
メモリ・アクセスには文字独自のワードが必要です:

@example
create v4 
  104 c, 97 c, 108 c, 108 c, 111 c,
v4 4 chars + c@@ .
v4 5 chars dump
@end example

スタック上の文字列の推奨される表現は @code{addr u-count} です。ここで、@code{addr} は文字列の最初の文字のアドレスで、
@code{u-count} は文字列の文字数です。

@example
v4 5 type
@end example

以下を使用すると文字列定数を取得できます

@example
s" hello, world" .s
type
@end example

@code{s"} と文字列の間にスペースがあることを確かめてください。 @code{s"} は通常の Forth ワードであり、 空白(white
space)で区切る必要があります(スペースを削除するとどうなるかを試してみましょう)。

ただし、 この @code{s"} のインタプリタでの使用(interpretive use)は非常に制限されています。 文字列は、 @code{s"}
が次に呼び出されるまでの間だけ存在します(一部の Forth システムはこれらの文字列を複数保持しますが、 普通は未だ限られた寿命です)。

@example
s" hello," s" world" .s
type
type
@end example

あなたは定義内で @code{s"} を使用することもでき、 (定義が続く限り、)その結果の文字列は永久に存続します:

@example
: foo s" hello," s" world" ;
foo .s
type
type
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{Emit ( c -- )} は @code{c} を(数値ではなく)文字として出力します。 これを使って @code{type (
addr u -- )} を実装してみましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Memory Blocks}


@node Alignment Tutorial, Floating Point Tutorial, Characters and Strings Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Alignment
@cindex alignment tutorial
@cindex memory alignment tutorial

多くのプロセッサでは、 @code{@@} と @code{!} を使用してセルにアクセスする場合、 メモリ内でセ​​ルをアライメントする必要があります
(プロセッサがアライメントを必要としない場合でも、 アライメントされたセルへのアクセスは高速です)。

@code{Create} は @code{here}(つまり、 次の割り当てが行われる場所、
そして@code{create}されたワードが指す場所)でアライメントします。 同様に、
@code{allocate}によって生成されたメモリはアライメントしたアドレスから始まります。 アライメントしたアドレスに @code{cells}
の数値 を足すと、 次のアライメントされたアドレスが生成されます。

ただし、 @code{char+} および @code{chars}
を含むアドレス演算では、セルにアライメントしていないアドレスが作成される可能性があります。 @code{Aligned ( addr -- a-addr
)} は、 その次のアライメントせされたアドレスを生成します:

@example
v3 char+ aligned .s @@ .
v3 char+ .s @@ .
@end example

同様に、 @code{align} は @code{here} を次のアライメントされたアドレスに進めます:

@example
create v5 97 c,
here .
align here .
1000 ,
@end example

注意: プログラムを移植可能にしたい場合は、 プロセッサがそれらを必要としない場合でも、
アライメントれたアドレスを使用する必要があることに注意してください。

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Address arithmetic}

@node Floating Point Tutorial, Files Tutorial, Alignment Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Floating Point
@cindex floating point tutorial
@cindex FP tutorial

Forth の浮動小数点(floating-point)(FP)の、 数値と算術演算は、 ほぼ期待された通りに機能しますが、
特筆すべき点がいくつかあります:

最初の点は Forth に固有のものではありませんが、 非常に重要で、 まだ広く知られていないため、 ここで言及します。
浮動小数点数は実数(real)ではありません。 実数(real)が持ち、 あらゆる種類の数値に期待される多くの性質(算術法則など)は、
浮動小数点数には当てはまりません。 浮動小数点演算したい場合、 浮動小数点演算の問題とその回避方法について学ぶ必要があります。 良い出発点は
@cite{David Goldberg,
@uref{https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19957-01/806-3568/ncg_goldberg.html,What
Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic}, ACM
Computing Surveys 23(1):5@minus{}48, March 1991} です。

Forth ソース・コードでは、リテラル浮動小数点数には指数が必要です(例: @code{1e0})。これは、 @code{1e}
のように短く書くことも、 @code{+1.0e+0} のように長く書くこともでき、 その間にはさまざまなバリエーションがあります。 その理由は、
歴史的な理由により、 Forth は小数点のみ(例: @code{1.}) の数を 2 セル整数を示すものとして解釈(interpret)するためです。
例:

@example
2e 2e f+ f.
@end example

リテラル浮動小数点数のもう 1 つの要件は、 現在の基数が 10 進数であることです。 16 進数の @code{1e}
は整数として解釈(interpret)されます:

Forth には、Forth-2012 に準拠した浮動小数点数用の別個のスタックがあります。 このモデルの利点の 1 つは、
浮動小数点数にアクセスするときにセルが邪魔にならないこと、 またその逆も同様であることです。 Forth には、 浮動小数点スタック(FP
スタック)を操作するためのワードのセットがあります:  @code{fdup fswap fdrop fover frot} や (非標準の、)
@code{fnip ftuck fpick}

FP 算術ワードには @code{F} という接頭辞が付きます。 通常の @code{f+ f- f* f/ f** fnegate} のほか、 他の、
関数用の多数のワード (例: @code{fsqrt fsin fln fmin}) があります。 期待されるワードの 1 つが @code{f=}
ですが、 @code{f=} は標準にはありません。 浮動小数点数の計算結果は通常不正確であるため、 正確な比較は通常間違いであり、
近似的な比較を使用する必要があります。 残念ながら、この目的のための標準のワードである @code{f~} は適切に設計されていないため、 Gforth
では @code{f~abs} と @code{f~rel} も提供しています。

そしてもちろん、 メモリ内の浮動小数点数にアクセスするためのワード(@code{f@@ f!})や、 アドレス演算用のワード(@code{floats
float+ faligned})もあります。 メモリ内の IEEE 書式の単精度および倍精度数値にアクセスするために、 @code{sf} および
@code{df} プレフィックスを付けた、 これらのワードのバリエーションもあります。 その主な目的は、
外部浮動小数点数データ(ファイルから読み取られた、 またはファイルに書き込まれるデータなど)にアクセスすることです。

以下は、 ドット出力ワード(dot-product word)とその使用例です:

@example
: v* ( f_addr1 nstride1 f_addr2 nstride2 ucount -- r )
  >r swap 2swap swap 0e r> 0 ?DO
    dup f@@ over + 2swap dup f@@ f* f+ over + 2swap
  LOOP
  2drop 2drop ;

create v 1.23e f, 4.56e f, 7.89e f,

v 1 floats  v 1 floats  3  v* f.
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
二次方程式を解くプログラムを作成してみましょう。 次に、 @cite{Henry G. Baker,
@uref{https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.111.4448&rep=rep1&type=pdf,You
Could Learn a Lot from a Quadratic}, ACM SIGPLAN Notices,
33(1):30@minus{}39, January 1998} を読んで、 そのプログラムを改善できるかどうか確認してください。 最後に、
元のバージョンと改良されたバージョンで異なる結果が生成されるテスト・ケースを探しましょう。
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Floating Point}; @ref{Floating point stack}; @ref{Number
Conversion}; @ref{Memory Access}; @ref{Address arithmetic}.

@node Files Tutorial, Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy Tutorial, Floating Point Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Files
@cindex files tutorial

このセクションでは、 Forth 内でファイルを使用する方法について簡単に説明します。 それは 5 つの簡単なステップに分かれています:

@enumerate 1
@item 入力用に ASCII テキスト・ファイルを開きます
@item 出力用にファイルを開く
@item 文字列が一致する (または他の条件が満たされる) まで入力ファイルを読み取ります
@item 入力 (が変更されたかどうかに関係なく、) から数行を出力に書き込みます
@item ファイルを閉じます。
@end enumerate

こちらも参照ください: @ref{General files}

@subsection Open file for input

@example
s" foo.in"  r/o open-file throw Value fd-in
@end example

@subsection Create file for output

@example
s" foo.out" w/o create-file throw Value fd-out
@end example

使用可能なファイル・モードは、 読み取り専用アクセスの場合は r/o 、 読み取り/書き込み アクセスの場合は r/w 、書き込み専用アクセスの場合は
w/o です。 必要に応じて、 読み取りと書き込みの両方のファイルを r/w で開くこともできます。 すべてのファイル用ワードはエラーコードを返します。
ほとんどのアプリケーションでは、 @code{throw} を使用してエラー・コードを外部のエラー・ハンドラーに渡すのが最善(best)です。

開いたり(opening)割り当てたり(assigning)するためのワードが必要な場合は、 以下のように定義します:

@example
0 Value fd-in
0 Value fd-out
: open-input ( addr u -- )  r/o open-file throw to fd-in ;
: open-output ( addr u -- )  w/o create-file throw to fd-out ;
@end example

使用例:

@example
s" foo.in" open-input
s" foo.out" open-output
@end example

@subsection ファイルの特定の行をスキャン

@example
256 Constant max-line
Create line-buffer  max-line 2 + allot

: scan-file ( addr u -- )
  begin
      line-buffer max-line fd-in read-line throw
  while
         >r 2dup line-buffer r> compare 0=
     until
  else
     drop
  then
  2drop ;
@end example

@code{read-line ( addr u1 fd -- u2 flag ior )} は、 addr からのバッファに最大 u1
バイトを読み取り、 読み取ったバイト数と、 ファイルの終わりに達した場合に false になるフラグと、 エラーコードを返します。

@code{compare ( addr1 u1 addr2 u2 -- n )} は 2 つの文字列を比較し、 両方の文字列が等しい場合は 0
を返します。 最初の文字列の方が字句的に大きい(lexically greater)場合は正の数値を返し、 2
番目の文字列の方が字句的に大きい(lexically greater)場合は負の数値を返します。

このループは、 まだ見たことがないですよね。 このループは出口が2つあります。  @code{while}
はスタック上にある読み取ったバイト数で終了するため、 それを個別にクリーンアップする必要があります。 そのクリーンアップする部分は
@code{else} の後にあります。

使用例:

@example
s" The text I search is here" scan-file
@end example

@subsection Copy input to output

@example
: copy-file ( -- )
  begin
      line-buffer max-line fd-in read-line throw
  while
      line-buffer swap fd-out write-line throw
  repeat 
  drop ;
@end example
@c !! does not handle long lines, no newline at end of file

@subsection Close files

@example
fd-in close-file throw
fd-out close-file throw
@end example

これも、同様に、 定義に組み込むことができます:

@example
: close-input ( -- )  fd-in close-file throw ;
: close-output ( -- )  fd-out close-file throw ;
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{copy-file} を変更して、 2 行目が一致するまでコピーするようにするにはどうすればよいでしょうか？
セクションの開始行と終了行を指定して、 テキスト・ファイルのセクションを抽出するプログラムを作成できますか？
@end quotation

@node Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy Tutorial, Execution Tokens Tutorial, Files Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy
@cindex semantics tutorial
@cindex interpretation semantics tutorial
@cindex compilation semantics tutorial
@cindex immediate, tutorial

ワードがコンパイルされるときと、 解釈(interpret)されるときでは異なる動作をします。 たとえば、 @code{+} について考えてみましょう:

@example
1 2 + .
: foo + ;
@end example

これらの 2 つの振る舞いは、 コンパイルと解釈(interpret)のセマンティクスとして知られています。 通常のワード(例:
@code{+})の場合、 コンパイル・セマンティクスは、 現在定義されているワード(上記の例では
@code{foo})に解釈セマンティクスを追加します。 つまり、 後で @code{foo} が実行されると、 @code{+}
の解釈(interret)セマンティクス(つまり、2 つの数値の加算)が実行されます。

ただし、 @code{if} のような制御フロー・ワードなど、 デフォルト以外のコンパイル・セマンティクスを持つワードが存在します。
@code{immediate}
を使用すると、最後に定義されたワードのコンパイル・セマンティクスを解釈(interpret)セマンティクスと等しくなるように変更できます:

@example
: [FOO] ( -- )
 5 . ; immediate

[FOO]
: bar ( -- )
  [FOO] ;
bar
see bar
@end example

デフォルト以外のコンパイル・セマンティクスのワードだと知らしめる 2 つの慣習は、 名前を括弧で囲む(より頻繁に使用される)ことと、
名前をすべて大文字で記述する(あまり使用されない)ことです。

@code{if} などの一部のワードについては、 その解釈(interpret)セマンティクスを使用するのは通常間違いであるため、 それらを
@code{compile-only} としてマークし、 解釈(interpret)すると警告が表示されます。

@example
: flip ( -- )
 6 . ; compile-only \ but not immediate
flip

: flop ( -- )
 flip ;
flop
@end example

この例では、 最初に @code{flip} の解釈(interpret)セマンティクスが使用されます(警告が表示されます)。 @code{flip}
の 2 番目の使用では、 コンパイル・セマンティクスが使用されます(警告は表示されません)。 この例では、 compile-only
が実行時(run-time)ではなくテキスト解釈時(text interpretation time)に評価されるプロパティであることもわかります。

テキスト・インタプリタには 2 つの状態があります。 解釈(interpret)状態では、
遭遇したワードの解釈(interpret)セマンティクスを実行します。 コンパイル状態では、これらのワードのコンパイル・セマンティクスが実行されます。

特に、 @code{:} はコンパイル状態に切り替え、 @code{;} は解釈(interpret)状態に戻ります。 これらには、
状態を切り替えるだけがその効果である @code{]} (コンパイル状態に切り替える) と @code{[}
(解釈(interpret)状態に切り替える) が含まれています。

@example
: xxx ( -- )
  [ 5 . ]
;

xxx
see xxx
@end example

これらの角括弧(brackets)は、 上記の命名慣習の源でもあります。

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Interpretation and Compilation Semantics}


@node Execution Tokens Tutorial, Exceptions Tutorial, Interpretation and Compilation Semantics and Immediacy Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Execution Tokens
@cindex execution tokens tutorial
@cindex XT tutorial

@code{' word} は、 ワードの実行トークン(execution token)(XT)を提供します。 XT は、
ワードの解釈(interpret)セマンティクスを表すセルです。 このセマンティクスは @code{execute} で実行できます:

@example
' + .s
1 2 rot execute .
@end example

XT は C の関数ポインタに似ています。 ただし、 パラメータがスタックで渡されるため、もう少し柔軟になります:

@example
: map-array ( ... addr u xt -- ... )
\ addr で始まり u 個の要素を含む配列のすべての要素に対して
\ xt ( ... x -- ... ) を実行します
  @{ xt @}
  cells over + swap ?do
    i @@ xt execute
  1 cells +loop ;

create a 3 , 4 , 2 , -1 , 4 ,
a 5 ' . map-array .s
0 a 5 ' + map-array .

s" max-n" environment? drop .s \ 下記比較初期値用に整数最大値を得る
a 5 ' min map-array . \ 最初の要素は、 environment? で取得した整数最大値と比較
@end example

生成するより消費する要素が 1 つ多いワードの XT に対して map-array を使用できます。 理論的には、他の XT でも使用できますが、
スタック効果は配列のサイズに依存するため、理解するのが困難です。

XT はセルサイズであるため、 メモリに保存し、 他のセルと同様にスタック上で操作できます。 @code{compile,} を使用して XT
をワードにコンパイルすることもできます:

@example
: foo1 ( n1 n2 -- n )
   [ ' + compile, ] ;
see foo1
@end example

@code{compile,} は標準ではコンパイル・セマンティクスがないため、 上記は標準ではないけれども、 良い Forth
システムでは動作します。 うまくいかなかったモノついては、 以下を使用してください

@example
: [compile,] compile, ; immediate

: foo1 ( n1 n2 -- n )
   [ ' + ] [compile,] ;
see foo1
@end example

@code{'} は、 デフォルトでコンパイル・セマンティクスを持つワードです。 コンパイル中ではなく、
解釈(interpret)セマンティクスの実行時、 その次のワードを解析(parse)します。

@example
: foo ( -- xt )
  ' ;
see foo
: bar ( ... "word" -- ... )
  ' execute ;
see bar
1 2 bar + .
@end example

コンパイル中にワードを解析(parse)し、 その XT をコンパイルして、 実行時にスタックにプッシュされるようにしたいことがよくあります。
@code{[']} はこれを行います:

@example
: xt-+ ( -- xt )
  ['] + ;
see xt-+
1 2 xt-+ execute .
@end example

多くのプログラマーは、 @code{'} とそれが解析(parse)するワードを 1 つの単位として認識し、 コンパイル時に @code{[']}
のように動作することを期待し、 実際の動作に混乱する傾向があります。 あなたがもしそうなら、 Forth システムは @code{'} を 1
つの単位として捉えているだけであり、
それが解析(parse)ワードであるとはまったく考えていないことを覚えておいてください(この問題でプログラマーの便宜を図る試みは、 通常、
さらにひどい落とし穴につながります。
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl98.ps.gz,
@code{State}-smartness---Why it is evil and How to Exorcise it})。

XT の作成および実行は、 インタプリタの状態には影響を受けないことに注意してください。 つまり、 コンパイル状態で @code{'}
を実行した場合でも、 解釈(interpret)セマンティクスが得られます。 そして、 そこでの状態が何であれ、 @code{execute} は XT
によって表されるセマンティクス(つまり、@code{'} で生成された XT の場合は解釈(interpret)セマンティクス)を実行します。

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Tokens for Words}


@node Exceptions Tutorial, Defining Words Tutorial, Execution Tokens Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Exceptions
@cindex exceptions tutorial

@code{throw ( n -- )} は、 n がゼロでない限り例外を引き起こします。

@example
100 throw .s
0 throw .s
@end example

@code{catch ( ... xt -- ... n )} は @code{execute} と同様に動作しますが、 例外をキャッチし、
スタック上に例外の数値(または XT が例外なしで実行された場合は 0)をプッシュします。 例外があった場合、 スタックの深さは
@code{catch} の実行直前と同一です。

@example
.s
3 0 ' / catch .s
3 2 ' / catch .s
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{catch} の代わりに @code{execute} を使用して同じことを試してみましょう。
@end quotation

@code{throw} は、常に動的に直近にこの @code{throw} を囲んでいる(定義の) @code{catch} にジャンプします、
たとえそのジャンプを達成するために複数の呼び出しレベルを飛び越す必要がある場合でもです:

@example
: foo 100 throw ;
: foo1 foo ." after foo" ;
: bar ['] foo1 catch ;
bar .
@end example

多くの場合、 定義が例外によって終了した場合でも、 定義を終了したときに値を復元することが重要です。 以下のようにしてみるのはどうでしょうか:

@example
: ...
   save-x
   ['] word-changing-x catch ( ... n )
   restore-x
   ( ... n ) throw ;
@end example

しかし、 これでも、 たとえば、@code{catch} と @code{restore-x} の間を実行中にユーザーが @kbd{Ctrl-C}
を押すなどしたら安全ではありません。

Gforth は、そのような場合に対して安全な代替例外処理構文(alternative exception handling syntax)
@code{try ...restore ... endtry} を提供します。  @code{try} と @code{endtry}
の間のコードに例外があった場合、 スタックの深さが復元され、 例外数値がスタックにプッシュされ、 @code{restore}
の直後から実行が続行されます。

以下は、 上記のコードと同等の、 より安全なコードです

@example
: ...
  save-x
  try
    word-changing-x 0
  restore
    restore-x
  endtry
  throw ;
@end example

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Exception Handling}


@node Defining Words Tutorial, Arrays and Records Tutorial, Exceptions Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Defining Words
@cindex defining words tutorial
@cindex does> tutorial
@cindex create...does> tutorial

@c before semantics?

これまでに出てきた @code{:} や @code{create} や @code{variable} は定義ワードです。
これらは他のワードを定義します。 @code{Constant} はもう一つの定義ワードです:

@example
5 constant foo
foo .
@end example

@code{variable} や @code{constant} でも接頭辞 @code{2} (2倍長セル) や @code{f} (浮動小数点)
を使用することができます。

あなた独自の定義ワードを定義することもできます。 例:

@example
: variable ( "name" -- )
  create 0 , ;
@end example

また、 単にアドレスを生成する以外のことを行うワードを作成する定義ワードを定義することもできます:

@example
: constant ( n "name" -- )
  create ,
does> ( -- n )
  ( addr ) @@ ;

5 constant foo
foo .
@end example

上記の @code{constant} の定義は @code{does>} で終了します。 つまり、 @code{does>} は @code{;}
を置き換えるのですが、 他のことも行います。 最後に定義されたワードを変更して、 ワード本体(body)のアドレスをプッシュし、 呼び出されるたびに
@code{does>} の後のコードを実行します。

上の例では、 @code{constant} は @code{,} を使用して @code{foo} の本体に 5 を格納します。
@code{foo} が実行されると、 本体のアドレスがスタックにプッシュされ、 (@code{does>} の後のコードにより、)そこから 5
がフェッチされます。

@code{does>} の脇のスタック・コメントは、 @code{does>} の後のコードのスタック効果ではなく、
定義されたワードのスタック効果です(違いは、 @code{does>} の後のコードは @code{does>}
の脇のスタック・コメントには書いてない、 ワード本体(body)のアドレスを期待している点です)。

これらの定義ワードを使用すると、 (他の)定義ワードが関係する場合にファクタリングを行うことができます。  たとえば、
フィールド・オフセットは常にアドレスに加算するものですが、 その代わりに以下を定義します

@example
2 cells constant offset-field1
@end example

この offset-field1 は以下のように使います

@example
( addr ) offset-field1 +
@end example

ここで、 あなたは以下のような定義ワードをを定義できます

@example
: simple-field ( n "name" -- )
  create ,
does> ( n1 -- n1+n )
  ( addr ) @@ + ;
@end example

フィールド・オフセットの定義と使用は以下のようになります:

@example
2 cells simple-field field1
create mystruct 4 cells allot
mystruct .s field1 .s drop
@end example

@code{does>} の後のコードを実行せずに、 そのワードで何かをしたい場合は、 @code{>body ( xt -- addr )}
を使用すれば @code{create} したワードの本体(body)にアクセスできます:

@example
: value ( n "name" -- )
  create ,
does> ( -- n1 )
  @@ ;
: to ( n "name" -- )
  ' >body ! ;

5 value foo
foo .
7 to foo
foo .
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
(@code{abort} の XT の先頭に、) XT を格納するワードを作成する、 @code{defer ( "name" -- )} を定義し、
実行時に XT を @code{execute} で実行するようにしてみましょう。 間接再帰は @code{defer} の応用の 1 つです。
@end quotation

こちらも参照ください: @ref{User-defined Defining Words}


@node Arrays and Records Tutorial, POSTPONE Tutorial, Defining Words Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Arrays and Records
@cindex arrays tutorial
@cindex records tutorial
@cindex structs tutorial

Forth には配列を定義するための標準ワードはありませんが、 アドレス演算に基づいて自分で配列を構築できます。
配列とレコードを定義するためのワードを定義することもできます(@pxref{Defining Words Tutorial,, Defining
Words})。

Forth の初心者がワードの定義について学ぶときに最初に着手するプロジェクトの 1 つが配列定義ワード(ことによっては n 次元配列)です。
さぁあなたもやってみましょう。 あなたはそこから何かを学ぶでしょう。 ただし、
後からこれらのワードをほとんど使用しないことがわかってもがっかりしないでください(不適切に使用するとさらに悪いことになります)。
私はまだ有用な配列ワードのセットを見つけられていません。 ニーズがあまりにも多様で、
(定義ワードを単純に使用した結果である、)名前付きのグローバル配列は、 柔軟性が十分ではないことがよくあります(たとえば、
どのようにしてパラメーターを渡すか、など)。 同様のプロジェクトのもう 1 つは、 文字列の処理に役立つワードのセットです。

その一方、 レコード・ワードには便利なセットがあり、 @file{compat/struct.fs} で定義されています。 これらのワードは
Gforth で事前定義されています。 これらについては、 このマニュアルの他の場所で詳しく説明されています(@pxref{Structures}
参照)。 上記の @code{simple-field} の例は、 このパッケージのフィールドの簡略化されたバリエーションです。


@node POSTPONE Tutorial, Literal Tutorial, Arrays and Records Tutorial, Tutorial
@section @code{POSTPONE}
@cindex postpone tutorial

@code{POSTPONE} を使用すると、 (解釈(interpret)セマンティクスをコンパイルする代わりに、)
ワードのコンパイル・セマンティクスをコンパイルできます:

@example
: MY-+ ( Compilation: -- ; Run-time of compiled code: n1 n2 -- n )
 POSTPONE + ; immediate
: foo ( n1 n2 -- n )
 MY-+ ;
1 2 foo .
see foo
@end example

@code{foo} の定義中に、 テキスト・インタプリタは @code{MY-+} のコンパイル・セマンティクスを実行し、 それが @code{+}
のコンパイル・セマンティクスを実行します。 つまり、 @code{+} を @code{foo} 内にコンパイルします。

この例では、 コンパイル・セマンティクスとコンパイルされたコードのスタック効果について個別のスタック・コメントも表示します。
デフォルトのコンパイル・セマンティクスを持つワードの場合、 通常、 これらのスタック効果は表示されません。
これらのワードのコンパイル・セマンティクスのスタック効果は常に @code{( -- )} であり、
コンパイルされたコードのスタック効果は解釈(interpret)セマンティクスのスタック効果です。

注意: この方法でコンパイル・セマンティクスを実行する場合、 インタプリタの状態には影響を受けないことに注意してください。
あなたは解釈的(interpretively)に実行することもできます。 例:

@example
: foo2 ( n1 n2 -- n )
 [ MY-+ ] ;
1 2 foo2 .
see foo2
@end example

@c !! repair.fs
ただし、 これが常に機能するとは限らない、良くない Forth システムがいくつかあるため、 この方法は 1999 年に非標準となりました。

@code{POSTPONE} を使用する別の例を以下に示します:

@example
: MY-- ( Compilation: -- ; Run-time of compiled code: n1 n2 -- n )
 POSTPONE negate POSTPONE + ; immediate compile-only
: bar ( n1 n2 -- n )
  MY-- ;
2 1 bar .
see bar
@end example

@code{ENDIF} は以下の方法で定義できます:

@example
: ENDIF ( Compilation: orig -- )
  POSTPONE then ; immediate
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{2dup} と同等のコンパイル・セマンティクスを持つ @code{MY-2DUP} を作成しますが、 コンパイルされるのは
@code{over over} になるようにしてみましょう。
@end quotation

@c !! @xref{Macros} for reference


@node Literal Tutorial, Advanced macros Tutorial, POSTPONE Tutorial, Tutorial
@section @code{Literal}
@cindex literal tutorial

数値を @code{POSTPONE} することはできません:

@example
: [FOO] POSTPONE 500 ; immediate
@end example

代わりに @code{LITERAL (compilation: n --; run-time: -- n )} を使用します:

@example
: [FOO] ( compilation: --; run-time: -- n )
  500 POSTPONE literal ; immediate

: flip [FOO] ;
flip .
see flip
@end example

@code{LITERAL} は、 コンパイル時(コンパイル・セマンティクスが実行されるとき)に数値を消費し、
実行時(コンパイルされたコードが実行されるとき)にそれをプッシュします。 @code{LITERAL} のよくある使用法は、
コンパイル時に計算された数値を現在のワードにコンパイルすることです:

@example
: bar ( -- n )
  [ 2 2 + ] literal ;
see bar
@end example

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
上記の例を @code{: bar ( -- n ) [ 2 2 + ]L ;} と記述できるような @code{]L} を定義してみましょう。
@end quotation

@c !! @xref{Macros} for reference


@node Advanced macros Tutorial, Compilation Tokens Tutorial, Literal Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Advanced macros
@cindex macros, advanced tutorial
@cindex run-time code generation, tutorial

@ref{Execution Tokens Tutorial,, Execution Tokens} の @code{map-array}
について再検討してみましょう。 @code{map-array} は @code{execute} を頻繁に実行しますが、 これは一部の Forth
実装では比較的高価な操作です。 @code{compile,} と @code{POSTPONE} を使用すると、 これらの
@code{execute} を削除し、 直接実行されるワードを含むワードを生成できます:

@c use ]] ... [[
@example
: compile-map-array ( compilation: xt -- ; run-time: ... addr u -- ... )
\ at run-time, execute xt ( ... x -- ... ) for each element of the
\ array beginning at addr and containing u elements
  @{ xt @}
  POSTPONE cells POSTPONE over POSTPONE + POSTPONE swap POSTPONE ?do
    POSTPONE i POSTPONE @@ xt compile,
  1 cells POSTPONE literal POSTPONE +loop ;

: sum-array ( addr u -- n )
 0 rot rot [ ' + compile-map-array ] ;
see sum-array
a 5 sum-array .
@end example

コードの生成には Forth の機能を最大限に活用できます。 以下に、 コードがループ内で生成される例を示します:

@example
: compile-vmul-step ( compilation: n --; run-time: n1 addr1 -- n2 addr2 )
\ n2=n1+(addr1)*n, addr2=addr1+cell
  POSTPONE tuck POSTPONE @@
  POSTPONE literal POSTPONE * POSTPONE +
  POSTPONE swap POSTPONE cell+ ;

: compile-vmul ( compilation: addr1 u -- ; run-time: addr2 -- n )
\ n=v1*v2 (inner product), where the v_i are represented as addr_i u
  0 postpone literal postpone swap
  [ ' compile-vmul-step compile-map-array ]
  postpone drop ;
see compile-vmul

: a-vmul ( addr -- n )
\ n=a*v, where v is a vector that's as long as a and starts at addr
 [ a 5 compile-vmul ] ;
see a-vmul
a a-vmul .
@end example

この例では @code{compile-map-array} を使用していますが、 代わりに @code{map-array}
を使用することもできます(是非試してみてください)。

この手法を使用すると、 巨大な行列を効率的に乗算できます。 行列の乗算では、 一方の行列のすべての行ともう一方の行列のすべての列を乗算します。 1
行のコードを 1 回生成し、 それをすべての列に使用できます。 この手法の唯一の欠点は、
生成されたコードによって消費されたメモリを完了時に開放するのが面倒なことです(さらに複雑な場合は移植可能ではありません)。

@c !! @xref{Macros} for reference


@node Compilation Tokens Tutorial, Wordlists and Search Order Tutorial, Advanced macros Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Compilation Tokens
@cindex compilation tokens, tutorial
@cindex CT, tutorial

このセクションは Gforth 固有です。 スキップしても構いません。

@code{' word compile,} は解釈(interpret)セマンティクスをコンパイルします。
デフォルトのコンパイル・セマンティクスを持つワードの場合、 これはコンパイル・セマンティクスを実行するのと同じです。
他のワードのコンパイル・セマンティクス(解釈(interpret)セマンティクスを持たない @code{if} などのワード)を表すために、
Gforth にはコンパイル・トークン(CTと略します。 2つのセルで構成)と、 ワード @code{comp'} と、 @code{[comp']}
の概念があります。 @code{execute} を使用して、 CT によって表されるコンパイル・セマンティクスを実行できます:

@example
: foo2 ( n1 n2 -- n )
   [ comp' + execute ] ;
see foo2
@end example

@code{postpone,} を使用して、 CT によって表されるコンパイル・セマンティクスをコンパイルできます:

@example
: foo3 ( -- )
  [ comp' + postpone, ] ;
see foo3
@end example

@code{[ comp' word postpone, ]} @code{POSTPONE word} と同等です。  @code{comp'} は、
解釈(interpret)セマンティクスを持たないワードに対して特に役立ちます:

@example
' if
comp' if .s 2drop
@end example

こちらも参照ください: @ref{Tokens for Words}


@node Wordlists and Search Order Tutorial, , Compilation Tokens Tutorial, Tutorial
@section Wordlists and Search Order
@cindex wordlists tutorial
@cindex search order, tutorial

ディクショナリ(辞書)は、 @code{allot} でメモリを割り当てることができる、 単なるメモリ領域ではなく、
複数のワード・リスト(wordlist)上にある Forth ワード達も含まれています。  ワード・リスト内のワードを検索するとき、 概念的には、
最も新しいワードから検索を開始し、 古いワードに向かって進みます(実際には、 最近のほとんどのシステムはハッシュ・テーブルを使用します)。 つまり、
古いワードと同一の名前のワードを定義すると、 新しいワードが古いワードを隠します。

どのワードリストがどの順序で検索されるかは、 検索順序(search order)によって決まります。  @code{order}
で検索順を表示できます。  まず、 最初に検索されたワード・リスト(wordlist)から始まる検索順序が表示され、
次に新しく定義されたワードを含むワード・リスト(wordlist)が表示されます:

@code{wordlist ( -- wid )} を使用して、 新しい空のワード・リスト(wordlist)を作成できます:

@example
wordlist constant mywords
@end example

@code{Set-current ( wid -- )} は、 新しく定義されたワードを入れるワード・リストを設定します(the current
wordlist):

@example
mywords set-current
order
@end example

このワード・リストは @code{wordlist} を使用して匿名で作成されたため、 Gforth は @code{mywords}
のワード・リスト名を表示しません。

@code{get-current ( -- wid)} で現在のワード・リストを取得できます。  現在のワード・リストに影響を与えずに、
指定のワード・リストに何かを入れたい場合、 通常は以下のようにします:

@example
get-current mywords set-current ( wid )
create someword
( wid ) set-current
@end example

検索順序は @code{set-order ( wid1 .. widn n -- )} で記述し、 @code{get-order ( -- wid1
.. widn n )} で読み取ることができます。  最初に検索されたワード・リストが最上位(topmost)になります。

@example
get-order mywords swap 1+ set-order
order
@end example

ええ、 @code{order} の出力内のワードリストの順序は、 スタック・コメントや @code{.s} の出力とは逆になっているため、
直感的ではありません。

@quotation 研究課題(assignment)
@code{>order ( wid -- )} を定義して、 最初に検索されるワード・リスト(wordlist)として @code{wid}
を検索順序に追加してみましょう。 @code{previous ( -- )} を定義してみましょう。 これは、
最初に検索されたワードリスト(wordlist)を検索順序から削除(search order)するものです。 定義したら、
境界条件を試してみましょう(クラッシュや、 そこから抜け出すことが困難または不可能な状況がいくつか見られる事でしょう)。
@end quotation

検索順序(search order)は、 Modula-2 モジュールや、 C++ の名前空間と同様の機能を提供するための強力な基盤です。  ただし、
この方法でプログラムをモジュール化しようとすると、 デバッグや 再利用/ファクタリング に関しては、
(大規模なプロジェクトの経験はありませんけれども、)私の経験では利点を上回る欠点があります。  他の言語/プログラミング環境では、
デバッグや再利用がそれほど強力ではないため、 これらの欠点はそれほど目立ちません。

@c !! example

こしらも参照ください: @ref{Word Lists}

@c ******************************************************************
@node Introduction, Literals in source code, Tutorial, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter An Introduction to Standard Forth
@cindex Forth - an introduction

The difference of this chapter from the Tutorial (@pxref{Tutorial}) is that
it is slower-paced in its examples, but uses them to dive deep into
explaining Forth internals (not covered by the Tutorial).  Apart from that,
this chapter covers far less material.  It is suitable for reading without
using a computer.

The primary purpose of this manual is to document Gforth. However, since
Forth is not a widely-known language and there is a lack of up-to-date
teaching material, it seems worthwhile to provide some introductory
material.  For other sources of Forth-related information, see
@ref{Forth-related information}.

The examples in this section should work on any Standard Forth; the output
shown was produced using Gforth. Each example attempts to reproduce the
exact output that Gforth produces. If you try out the examples (and you
should), what you should type is shown @kbd{like this} and Gforth's response
is shown @code{like this}. The single exception is that, where the example
shows @key{RET} it means that you should press the ``carriage return''
key. Unfortunately, some output formats for this manual cannot show the
difference between @kbd{this} and @code{this} which will make trying out the
examples harder (but not impossible).

Forth is an unusual language. It provides an interactive development
environment which includes both an interpreter and compiler. Forth
programming style encourages you to break a problem down into many
@cindex factoring
small fragments (@dfn{factoring}), and then to develop and test each
fragment interactively. Forth advocates assert that breaking the
edit-compile-test cycle used by conventional programming languages can lead
to great productivity improvements.

@menu
* Introducing the Text Interpreter::
* Stacks and Postfix notation::
* Your first definition::
* How does that work?::
* Forth is written in Forth::
* Review - elements of a Forth system::
* Where to go next::
* Exercises::                
@end menu

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Introducing the Text Interpreter, Stacks and Postfix notation, Introduction, Introduction
@section Introducing the Text Interpreter
@cindex text interpreter
@cindex outer interpreter

@c IMO this is too detailed and the pace is too slow for
@c an introduction.  If you know German, take a look at
@c https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/anton/lvas/skriptum-stack.html 
@c to see how I do it - anton 

@c nac-> Where I have accepted your comments 100% and modified the text
@c accordingly, I have deleted your comments. Elsewhere I have added a
@c response like this to attempt to rationalise what I have done. Of
@c course, this is a very clumsy mechanism for something that would be
@c done far more efficiently over a beer. Please delete any dialogue
@c you consider closed.

When you invoke the Forth image, you will see a startup banner printed and
nothing else (if you have Gforth installed on your system, try invoking it
now, by typing @kbd{gforth@key{RET}}). Forth is now running its command line
interpreter, which is called the @dfn{Text Interpreter} (also known as the
@dfn{Outer Interpreter}).  (You will learn a lot about the text interpreter
as you read through this chapter, for more detail @pxref{The Text
Interpreter}).

Although it's not obvious, Forth is actually waiting for your input. Type a
number and press the @key{RET} key:

@example
@kbd{45@key{RET}}  ok
@end example

Rather than give you a prompt to invite you to input something, the text
interpreter prints a status message @i{after} it has processed a line of
input. The status message in this case (``@code{ ok}'' followed by
carriage-return) indicates that the text interpreter was able to process all
of your input successfully. Now type something illegal:

@example
@kbd{qwer341@key{RET}}
*the terminal*:2: Undefined word
>>>qwer341<<<
Backtrace:
$2A95B42A20 throw 
$2A95B57FB8 no.extensions 
@end example

The exact text, other than the ``Undefined word'' may differ slightly on
your system, but the effect is the same; when the text interpreter detects
an error, it discards any remaining text on a line, resets certain internal
state and prints an error message. For a detailed description of error
messages see @ref{Error messages}.

The text interpreter waits for you to press carriage-return, and then
processes your input line. Starting at the beginning of the line, it breaks
the line into groups of characters separated by spaces. For each group of
characters in turn, it makes two attempts to do something:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex name dictionary
It tries to treat it as a command. It does this by searching a @dfn{name
dictionary}. If the group of characters matches an entry in the name
dictionary, the name dictionary provides the text interpreter with
information that allows the text interpreter to perform some actions. In
Forth jargon, we say that the group
@cindex word
@cindex definition
@cindex execution token
@cindex xt
of characters names a @dfn{word}, that the dictionary search returns an
@dfn{execution token (xt)} corresponding to the @dfn{definition} of the
word, and that the text interpreter executes the xt. Often, the terms
@dfn{word} and @dfn{definition} are used interchangeably.
@item
If the text interpreter fails to find a match in the name dictionary, it
tries to treat the group of characters as a number in the current number
base (when you start up Forth, the current number base is base 10). If the
group of characters legitimately represents a number, the text interpreter
pushes the number onto a stack (we'll learn more about that in the next
section).
@end itemize

If the text interpreter is unable to do either of these things with any
group of characters, it discards the group of characters and the rest of the
line, then prints an error message. If the text interpreter reaches the end
of the line without error, it prints the status message ``@code{ ok}''
followed by carriage-return.

This is the simplest command we can give to the text interpreter:

@example
@key{RET}  ok
@end example

The text interpreter did everything we asked it to do (nothing) without an
error, so it said that everything is ``@code{ ok}''. Try a slightly longer
command:

@example
@kbd{12 dup fred dup@key{RET}}
*the terminal*:3: Undefined word
12 dup >>>fred<<< dup
Backtrace:
$2A95B42A20 throw 
$2A95B57FB8 no.extensions 
@end example

When you press the carriage-return key, the text interpreter starts to work
its way along the line:

@itemize @bullet
@item
When it gets to the space after the @code{2}, it takes the group of
characters @code{12} and looks them up in the name dictionary@footnote{We
can't tell if it found them or not, but assume for now that it did
not}. There is no match for this group of characters in the name dictionary,
so it tries to treat them as a number. It is able to do this successfully,
so it puts the number, 12, ``on the stack'' (whatever that means).
@item
The text interpreter resumes scanning the line and gets the next group of
characters, @code{dup}. It looks it up in the name dictionary and (you'll
have to take my word for this) finds it, and executes the word @code{dup}
(whatever that means).
@item
Once again, the text interpreter resumes scanning the line and gets the
group of characters @code{fred}. It looks them up in the name dictionary,
but can't find them. It tries to treat them as a number, but they don't
represent any legal number.
@end itemize

At this point, the text interpreter gives up and prints an error
message. The error message shows exactly how far the text interpreter got in
processing the line. In particular, it shows that the text interpreter made
no attempt to do anything with the final character group, @code{dup}, even
though we have good reason to believe that the text interpreter would have
no problem looking that word up and executing it a second time.


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Stacks and Postfix notation, Your first definition, Introducing the Text Interpreter, Introduction
@section Stacks, postfix notation and parameter passing
@cindex text interpreter
@cindex outer interpreter

In procedural programming languages (like C and Pascal), the building-block
of programs is the @dfn{function} or @dfn{procedure}. These functions or
procedures are called with @dfn{explicit parameters}. For example, in C we
might write:

@example
total = total + new_volume(length,height,depth);
@end example

@noindent
where new_volume is a function-call to another piece of code, and total,
length, height and depth are all variables. length, height and depth are
parameters to the function-call.

In Forth, the equivalent of the function or procedure is the
@dfn{definition} and parameters are implicitly passed between definitions
using a shared stack that is visible to the programmer. Although Forth does
support variables, the existence of the stack means that they are used far
less often than in most other programming languages. When the text
interpreter encounters a number, it will place (@dfn{push}) it on the
stack. There are several stacks (the actual number is
implementation-dependent ...) and the particular stack used for any
operation is implied unambiguously by the operation being performed. The
stack used for all integer operations is called the @dfn{data stack} and,
since this is the stack used most commonly, references to ``the data stack''
are often abbreviated to ``the stack''.

The stacks have a last-in, first-out (LIFO) organisation. If you type:

@example
@kbd{1 2 3@key{RET}}  ok
@end example

Then this instructs the text interpreter to placed three numbers on the
(data) stack. An analogy for the behaviour of the stack is to take a pack of
playing cards and deal out the ace (1), 2 and 3 into a pile on the
table. The 3 was the last card onto the pile (``last-in'') and if you take a
card off the pile then, unless you're prepared to fiddle a bit, the card
that you take off will be the 3 (``first-out''). The number that will be
first-out of the stack is called the @dfn{top of stack}, which
@cindex TOS definition
is often abbreviated to @dfn{TOS}.

To understand how parameters are passed in Forth, consider the behaviour of
the definition @code{+} (pronounced ``plus''). You will not be surprised to
learn that this definition performs addition. More precisely, it adds two
numbers together and produces a result. Where does it get the two numbers
from? It takes the top two numbers off the stack. Where does it place the
result? On the stack. You can act out the behaviour of @code{+} with your
playing cards like this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Pick up two cards from the stack on the table
@item
Stare at them intently and ask yourself ``what @i{is} the sum of these two
numbers''
@item
Decide that the answer is 5
@item
Shuffle the two cards back into the pack and find a 5
@item
Put a 5 on the remaining ace that's on the table.
@end itemize

If you don't have a pack of cards handy but you do have Forth running, you
can use the definition @code{.s} to show the current state of the stack,
without affecting the stack. Type:

@example
@kbd{clearstacks 1 2 3@key{RET}} ok
@kbd{.s@key{RET}} <3> 1 2 3  ok
@end example

The text interpreter looks up the word @code{clearstacks} and executes it;
it tidies up the stacks (data and floating point stack) and removes any
entries that may have been left on them by earlier examples. The text
interpreter pushes each of the three numbers in turn onto the
stack. Finally, the text interpreter looks up the word @code{.s} and
executes it. The effect of executing @code{.s} is to print the ``<3>'' (the
total number of items on the stack) followed by a list of all the items on
the stack; the item on the far right-hand side is the TOS.

You can now type:

@example
@kbd{+ .s@key{RET}} <2> 1 5  ok
@end example

@noindent
which is correct; there are now 2 items on the stack and the result of the
addition is 5.

If you're playing with cards, try doing a second addition: pick up the two
cards, work out that their sum is 6, shuffle them into the pack, look for a
6 and place that on the table. You now have just one item on the stack. What
happens if you try to do a third addition? Pick up the first card, pick up
the second card -- ah! There is no second card. This is called a @dfn{stack
underflow} and consitutes an error. If you try to do the same thing with
Forth it often reports an error (probably a Stack Underflow or an Invalid
Memory Address error).

The opposite situation to a stack underflow is a @dfn{stack overflow}, which
simply accepts that there is a finite amount of storage space reserved for
the stack. To stretch the playing card analogy, if you had enough packs of
cards and you piled the cards up on the table, you would eventually be
unable to add another card; you'd hit the ceiling. Gforth allows you to set
the maximum size of the stacks. In general, the only time that you will get
a stack overflow is because a definition has a bug in it and is generating
data on the stack uncontrollably.

There's one final use for the playing card analogy. If you model your stack
using a pack of playing cards, the maximum number of items on your stack
will be 52 (I assume you didn't use the Joker). The maximum @i{value} of any
item on the stack is 13 (the King). In fact, the only possible numbers are
positive integer numbers 1 through 13; you can't have (for example) 0 or 27
or 3.52 or -2. If you change the way you think about some of the cards, you
can accommodate different numbers. For example, you could think of the Jack
as representing 0, the Queen as representing -1 and the King as representing
-2. Your @i{range} remains unchanged (you can still only represent a total
of 13 numbers) but the numbers that you can represent are -2 through 10.

In that analogy, the limit was the amount of information that a single stack
entry could hold, and Forth has a similar limit. In Forth, the size of a
stack entry is called a @dfn{cell}. The actual size of a cell is
implementation dependent and affects the maximum value that a stack entry
can hold. A Standard Forth provides a cell size of at least 16-bits, and
most desktop systems use a cell size of 32-bits.

Forth does not do any type checking for you, so you are free to manipulate
and combine stack items in any way you wish. A convenient way of treating
stack items is as 2's complement signed integers, and that is what Standard
words like @code{+} do. Therefore you can type:

@example
@kbd{-5 12 + .s@key{RET}} <1> 7  ok
@end example

If you use numbers and definitions like @code{+} in order to turn Forth into
a great big pocket calculator, you will realise that it's rather different
from a normal calculator. Rather than typing 2 + 3 = you had to type 2 3 +
(ignore the fact that you had to use @code{.s} to see the result). The
terminology used to describe this difference is to say that your calculator
uses @dfn{Infix Notation} (parameters and operators are mixed) whilst Forth
uses @dfn{Postfix Notation} (parameters and operators are separate), also
called @dfn{Reverse Polish Notation}.

Whilst postfix notation might look confusing to begin with, it has several
important advantages:

@itemize @bullet
@item
it is unambiguous
@item
it is more concise
@item
it fits naturally with a stack-based system
@end itemize

To examine these claims in more detail, consider these sums:

@example
6 + 5 * 4 =
4 * 5 + 6 =
@end example

If you're just learning maths or your maths is very rusty, you will probably
come up with the answer 44 for the first and 26 for the second. If you are a
bit of a whizz at maths you will remember the @i{convention} that
multiplication takes precendence over addition, and you'd come up with the
answer 26 both times. To explain the answer 26 to someone who got the answer
44, you'd probably rewrite the first sum like this:

@example
6 + (5 * 4) =
@end example

If what you really wanted was to perform the addition before the
multiplication, you would have to use parentheses to force it.

If you did the first two sums on a pocket calculator you would probably get
the right answers, unless you were very cautious and entered them using
these keystroke sequences:

6 + 5 = * 4 = 4 * 5 = + 6 =

Postfix notation is unambiguous because the order that the operators are
applied is always explicit; that also means that parentheses are never
required. The operators are @i{active} (the act of quoting the operator
makes the operation occur) which removes the need for ``=''.

The sum 6 + 5 * 4 can be written (in postfix notation) in two equivalent
ways:

@example
6 5 4 * +      or:
5 4 * 6 +
@end example

An important thing that you should notice about this notation is that the
@i{order} of the numbers does not change; if you want to subtract 2 from 10
you type @code{10 2 -}.

The reason that Forth uses postfix notation is very simple to explain: it
makes the implementation extremely simple, and it follows naturally from
using the stack as a mechanism for passing parameters. Another way of
thinking about this is to realise that all Forth definitions are @i{active};
they execute as they are encountered by the text interpreter. The result of
this is that the syntax of Forth is trivially simple.



@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Your first definition, How does that work?, Stacks and Postfix notation, Introduction
@section Your first Forth definition
@cindex first definition

Until now, the examples we've seen have been trivial; we've just been using
Forth as a bigger-than-pocket calculator. Also, each calculation we've shown
has been a ``one-off'' -- to repeat it we'd need to type it in
again@footnote{That's not quite true. If you press the up-arrow key on your
keyboard you should be able to scroll back to any earlier command, edit it
and re-enter it.} In this section we'll see how to add new words to Forth's
vocabulary.

The easiest way to create a new word is to use a @dfn{colon
definition}. We'll define a few and try them out before worrying too much
about how they work. Try typing in these examples; be careful to copy the
spaces accurately:

@example
: add-two 2 + . ;
: greet ." Hello and welcome" ;
: demo 5 add-two ;
@end example

@noindent
Now try them out:

@example
@kbd{greet@key{RET}} Hello and welcome  ok
@kbd{greet greet@key{RET}} Hello and welcomeHello and welcome  ok
@kbd{4 add-two@key{RET}} 6  ok
@kbd{demo@key{RET}} 7  ok
@kbd{9 greet demo add-two@key{RET}} Hello and welcome7 11  ok
@end example

The first new thing that we've introduced here is the pair of words @code{:}
and @code{;}. These are used to start and terminate a new definition,
respectively. The first word after the @code{:} is the name for the new
definition.

As you can see from the examples, a definition is built up of words that
have already been defined; Forth makes no distinction between definitions
that existed when you started the system up, and those that you define
yourself.

The examples also introduce the words @code{.} (dot), @code{."} (dot-quote)
and @code{dup} (dewp). Dot takes the value from the top of the stack and
displays it. It's like @code{.s} except that it only displays the top item
of the stack and it is destructive; after it has executed, the number is no
longer on the stack. There is always one space printed after the number, and
no spaces before it. Dot-quote defines a string (a sequence of characters)
that will be printed when the word is executed. The string can contain any
printable characters except @code{"}. A @code{"} has a special function; it
is not a Forth word but it acts as a delimiter (the way that delimiters work
is described in the next section). Finally, @code{dup} duplicates the value
at the top of the stack. Try typing @code{5 dup .s} to see what it does.

We already know that the text interpreter searches through the dictionary to
locate names. If you've followed the examples earlier, you will already have
a definition called @code{add-two}. Lets try modifying it by typing in a new
definition:

@example
@kbd{: add-two dup . ." + 2 = " 2 + . ;@key{RET}} redefined add-two  ok
@end example

Forth recognised that we were defining a word that already exists, and
printed a message to warn us of that fact. Let's try out the new definition:

@example
@kbd{9 add-two@key{RET}} 9 + 2 = 11  ok
@end example

@noindent
All that we've actually done here, though, is to create a new definition,
with a particular name. The fact that there was already a definition with
the same name did not make any difference to the way that the new definition
was created (except that Forth printed a warning message). The old
definition of add-two still exists (try @code{demo} again to see that this
is true). Any new definition will use the new definition of @code{add-two},
but old definitions continue to use the version that already existed at the
time that they were @code{compiled}.

Before you go on to the next section, try defining and redefining some words
of your own.

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node How does that work?, Forth is written in Forth, Your first definition, Introduction
@section How does that work?
@cindex parsing words

@c That's pretty deep (IMO way too deep) for an introduction. - anton

@c Is it a good idea to talk about the interpretation semantics of a
@c number? We don't have an xt to go along with it. - anton

@c Now that I have eliminated execution semantics, I wonder if it would not
@c be better to keep them (or add run-time semantics), to make it easier to
@c explain what compilation semantics usually does. - anton

@c nac-> I removed the term ``default compilation sematics'' from the
@c introductory chapter. Removing ``execution semantics'' was making
@c everything simpler to explain, then I think the use of this term made
@c everything more complex again. I replaced it with ``default
@c semantics'' (which is used elsewhere in the manual) by which I mean
@c ``a definition that has neither the immediate nor the compile-only
@c flag set''.

@c anton: I have eliminated default semantics (except in one place where it
@c means "default interpretation and compilation semantics"), because it
@c makes no sense in the presence of combined words.  I reverted to
@c "execution semantics" where necessary.

@c nac-> I reworded big chunks of the ``how does that work''
@c section (and, unusually for me, I think I even made it shorter!).  See
@c what you think -- I know I have not addressed your primary concern
@c that it is too heavy-going for an introduction. From what I understood
@c of your course notes it looks as though they might be a good framework. 
@c Things that I've tried to capture here are some things that came as a
@c great revelation here when I first understood them. Also, I like the
@c fact that a very simple code example shows up almost all of the issues
@c that you need to understand to see how Forth works. That's unique and
@c worthwhile to emphasise.

@c anton: I think it's a good idea to present the details, especially those
@c that you found to be a revelation, and probably the tutorial tries to be
@c too superficial and does not get some of the things across that make
@c Forth special.  I do believe that most of the time these things should
@c be discussed at the end of a section or in separate sections instead of
@c in the middle of a section (e.g., the stuff you added in "User-defined
@c defining words" leads in a completely different direction from the rest
@c of the section).

Now we're going to take another look at the definition of @code{add-two}
from the previous section. From our knowledge of the way that the text
interpreter works, we would have expected this result when we tried to
define @code{add-two}:

@example
@kbd{: add-two 2 + . ;@key{RET}}
*the terminal*:4: Undefined word
: >>>add-two<<< 2 + . ;
@end example

The reason that this didn't happen is bound up in the way that @code{:}
works. The word @code{:} does two special things. The first special thing
that it does is to prevent the text interpreter from ever seeing the
characters @code{add-two}. The text interpreter uses a variable called
@cindex modifying >IN
@code{>IN} (pronounced ``to-in'') to keep track of where it is in the input
line. When it encounters the word @code{:} it behaves in exactly the same
way as it does for any other word; it looks it up in the name dictionary,
finds its xt and executes it. When @code{:} executes, it looks at the input
buffer, finds the word @code{add-two} and advances the value of @code{>IN}
to point past it. It then does some other stuff associated with creating the
new definition (including creating an entry for @code{add-two} in the name
dictionary). When the execution of @code{:} completes, control returns to
the text interpreter, which is oblivious to the fact that it has been
tricked into ignoring part of the input line.

@cindex parsing words
Words like @code{:} -- words that advance the value of @code{>IN} and so
prevent the text interpreter from acting on the whole of the input line --
are called @dfn{parsing words}.

@cindex @code{state} - effect on the text interpreter
@cindex text interpreter - effect of state
The second special thing that @code{:} does is change the value of a
variable called @code{state}, which affects the way that the text
interpreter behaves. When Gforth starts up, @code{state} has the value 0,
and the text interpreter is said to be @dfn{interpreting}. During a colon
definition (started with @code{:}), @code{state} is set to -1 and the text
interpreter is said to be @dfn{compiling}.

In this example, the text interpreter is compiling when it processes the
string ``@code{2 + . ;}''. It still breaks the string down into character
sequences in the same way. However, instead of pushing the number @code{2}
onto the stack, it lays down (@dfn{compiles}) some magic into the definition
of @code{add-two} that will make the number @code{2} get pushed onto the
stack when @code{add-two} is @dfn{executed}. Similarly, the behaviours of
@code{+} and @code{.} are also compiled into the definition.

Certain kinds of words do not get compiled. These so-called @dfn{immediate
words} get executed (performed @i{now}) regardless of whether the text
interpreter is interpreting or compiling. The word @code{;} is an immediate
word. Rather than being compiled into the definition, it executes. Its
effect is to terminate the current definition, which includes changing the
value of @code{state} back to 0.

When you execute @code{add-two}, it has a @dfn{run-time effect} that is
exactly the same as if you had typed @code{2 + . @key{RET}} outside of a
definition.

In Forth, every word or number can be described in terms of two properties:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex interpretation semantics
Its @dfn{interpretation semantics} describe how it will behave when the text
interpreter encounters it in @dfn{interpret} state. The interpretation
semantics of a word are represented by its @dfn{execution token}
(@pxref{Execution token}).
@item
@cindex compilation semantics
Its @dfn{compilation semantics} describe how it will behave when the text
interpreter encounters it in @dfn{compile} state. The compilation semantics
of a word are represented by its @dfn{compilation token} (@pxref{Compilation
token}).
@end itemize

@noindent
Numbers are always treated in a fixed way:

@itemize @bullet
@item
When the number is @dfn{interpreted}, its behaviour is to push the number
onto the stack.
@item
When the number is @dfn{compiled}, a piece of code is appended to the
current definition that pushes the number when it runs. (In other words, the
compilation semantics of a number are to postpone its interpretation
semantics until the run-time of the definition that it is being compiled
into.)
@end itemize

Words don't always behave in such a regular way, but most have @i{default
semantics} which means that they behave like this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @dfn{interpretation semantics} of the word are to do something useful.
@item
The @dfn{compilation semantics} of the word are to append its
@dfn{interpretation semantics} to the current definition (so that its
run-time behaviour is to do something useful).
@end itemize

@cindex immediate words
The actual behaviour of any particular word can be controlled by using the
words @code{immediate} and @code{compile-only} when the word is
defined. These words set flags in the name dictionary entry of the most
recently defined word, and these flags are retrieved by the text interpreter
when it finds the word in the name dictionary.

A word that is marked as @dfn{immediate} has compilation semantics that are
identical to its interpretation semantics. In other words, it behaves like
this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @dfn{interpretation semantics} of the word are to do something useful.
@item
The @dfn{compilation semantics} of the word are to do something useful (and
actually the same thing); i.e., it is executed during compilation.
@end itemize

Marking a word as @dfn{compile-only} means that the text interpreter
produces a warning when encountering this word in interpretation state;
ticking the word (with @code{'} or @code{[']} also produces a warning.

It is never necessary to use @code{compile-only} (and it is not even part of
Standard Forth, though it is provided by many implementations)  but it is
good etiquette to apply it to a word that will not behave correctly (and
might have unexpected side-effects) in interpret state. For example, it is
only legal to use the conditional word @code{IF} within a definition. If you
forget this and try to use it elsewhere, the fact that (in Gforth) it is
marked as @code{compile-only} allows the text interpreter to generate a
helpful warning.

This example shows the difference between an immediate and a non-immediate
word:

@example
: show-state state @@ . ;
: show-state-now show-state ; immediate
: word1 show-state ;
: word2 show-state-now ;
@end example

The word @code{immediate} after the definition of @code{show-state-now}
makes that word an immediate word. These definitions introduce a new word:
@code{@@} (pronounced ``fetch''). This word fetches the value of a variable,
and leaves it on the stack. Therefore, the behaviour of @code{show-state} is
to print a number that represents the current value of @code{state}.

When you execute @code{word1}, it prints the number 0, indicating that the
system is interpreting. When the text interpreter compiled the definition of
@code{word1}, it encountered @code{show-state} whose compilation semantics
are to append its interpretation semantics to the current definition. When
you execute @code{word1}, it performs the interpretation semantics of
@code{show-state}.  At the time that @code{word1} (and therefore
@code{show-state}) is executed, the system is interpreting.

When you pressed @key{RET} after entering the definition of @code{word2},
you should have seen the number -1 printed, followed by ``@code{ ok}''. When
the text interpreter compiled the definition of @code{word2}, it encountered
@code{show-state-now}, an immediate word, whose compilation semantics are
therefore to perform its interpretation semantics. It is executed straight
away (even before the text interpreter has moved on to process another group
of characters; the @code{;} in this example). The effect of executing it is
to display the value of @code{state} @i{at the time that the definition of}
@code{word2} @i{is being defined}. Printing -1 demonstrates that the system
is compiling at this time. If you execute @code{word2} it does nothing at
all.

@cindex @code{."}, how it works
Before leaving the subject of immediate words, consider the behaviour of
@code{."} in the definition of @code{greet}, in the previous section. This
word is both a parsing word and an immediate word. Notice that there is a
space between @code{."} and the start of the text @code{Hello and welcome},
but that there is no space between the last letter of @code{welcome} and the
@code{"} character. The reason for this is that @code{."} is a Forth word;
it must have a space after it so that the text interpreter can identify
it. The @code{"} is not a Forth word; it is a @dfn{delimiter}. The examples
earlier show that, when the string is displayed, there is neither a space
before the @code{H} nor after the @code{e}. Since @code{."} is an immediate
word, it executes at the time that @code{greet} is defined. When it
executes, its behaviour is to search forward in the input line looking for
the delimiter. When it finds the delimiter, it updates @code{>IN} to point
past the delimiter. It also compiles some magic code into the definition of
@code{greet}; the xt of a run-time routine that prints a text string. It
compiles the string @code{Hello and welcome} into memory so that it is
available to be printed later. When the text interpreter gains control, the
next word it finds in the input stream is @code{;} and so it terminates the
definition of @code{greet}.


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Forth is written in Forth, Review - elements of a Forth system, How does that work?, Introduction
@section Forth is written in Forth
@cindex structure of Forth programs

When you start up a Forth compiler, a large number of definitions already
exist. In Forth, you develop a new application using bottom-up programming
techniques to create new definitions that are defined in terms of existing
definitions. As you create each definition you can test and debug it
interactively.

If you have tried out the examples in this section, you will probably have
typed them in by hand; when you leave Gforth, your definitions will be
lost. You can avoid this by using a text editor to enter Forth source code
into a file, and then loading code from the file using @code{include}
(@pxref{Forth source files}). A Forth source file is processed by the text
interpreter, just as though you had typed it in by hand@footnote{Actually,
there are some subtle differences -- see @ref{The Text Interpreter}.}.

Gforth also supports the traditional Forth alternative to using text files
for program entry (@pxref{Blocks}).

In common with many, if not most, Forth compilers, most of Gforth is
actually written in Forth. All of the @file{.fs} files in the installation
directory@footnote{For example, @file{/usr/local/share/gforth...}} are Forth
source files, which you can study to see examples of Forth programming.

Gforth maintains a history file that records every line that you type to the
text interpreter. This file is preserved between sessions, and is used to
provide a command-line recall facility. If you enter long definitions by
hand, you can use a text editor to paste them out of the history file into a
Forth source file for reuse at a later time (for more information
@pxref{Command-line editing}).


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Review - elements of a Forth system, Where to go next, Forth is written in Forth, Introduction
@section Review - elements of a Forth system
@cindex elements of a Forth system

To summarise this chapter:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Forth programs use @dfn{factoring} to break a problem down into small
fragments called @dfn{words} or @dfn{definitions}.
@item
Forth program development is an interactive process.
@item
The main command loop that accepts input, and controls both interpretation
and compilation, is called the @dfn{text interpreter} (also known as the
@dfn{outer interpreter}).
@item
Forth has a very simple syntax, consisting of words and numbers separated by
spaces or carriage-return characters. Any additional syntax is imposed by
@dfn{parsing words}.
@item
Forth uses a stack to pass parameters between words. As a result, it uses
postfix notation.
@item
To use a word that has previously been defined, the text interpreter
searches for the word in the @dfn{name dictionary}.
@item
Words have @dfn{interpretation semantics} and @dfn{compilation semantics}.
@item
The text interpreter uses the value of @code{state} to select between the
use of the @dfn{interpretation semantics} and the @dfn{compilation
semantics} of a word that it encounters.
@item
The relationship between the @dfn{interpretation semantics} and
@dfn{compilation semantics} for a word depends upon the way in which the
word was defined (for example, whether it is an @dfn{immediate} word).
@item
Forth definitions can be implemented in Forth (called @dfn{high-level
definitions}) or in some other way (usually a lower-level language and as a
result often called @dfn{low-level definitions}, @dfn{code definitions} or
@dfn{primitives}).
@item
Many Forth systems are implemented mainly in Forth.
@end itemize


@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Where to go next, Exercises, Review - elements of a Forth system, Introduction
@section Where To Go Next
@cindex where to go next

Amazing as it may seem, if you have read (and understood) this far, you know
almost all the fundamentals about the inner workings of a Forth system. You
certainly know enough to be able to read and understand the rest of this
manual and the Standard Forth document, to learn more about the facilities
that Forth in general and Gforth in particular provide. Even scarier, you
know almost enough to implement your own Forth system.  However, that's not
a good idea just yet... better to try writing some programs in Gforth.

Forth has such a rich vocabulary that it can be hard to know where to start
in learning it. This section suggests a few sets of words that are enough to
write small but useful programs. Use the word index in this document to
learn more about each word, then try it out and try to write small
definitions using it. Start by experimenting with these words:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Arithmetic: @code{+ - * / /MOD */ ABS INVERT}
@item
Comparison: @code{MIN MAX =}
@item
Logic: @code{AND OR XOR NOT}
@item
Stack manipulation: @code{DUP DROP SWAP OVER}
@item
Loops and decisions: @code{IF ELSE ENDIF ?DO I LOOP}
@item
Input/Output: @code{. ." EMIT CR KEY}
@item
Defining words: @code{: ; CREATE}
@item
Memory allocation words: @code{ALLOT ,}
@item
Tools: @code{SEE WORDS .S MARKER}
@end itemize

When you have mastered those, go on to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
More defining words: @code{VARIABLE CONSTANT VALUE TO CREATE DOES>}
@item
Memory access: @code{@@ !}
@end itemize

When you have mastered these, there's nothing for it but to read through the
whole of this manual and find out what you've missed.

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Exercises, , Where to go next, Introduction
@section Exercises
@cindex exercises

TODO: provide a set of programming excercises linked into the stuff done
already and into other sections of the manual. Provide solutions to all the
exercises in a .fs file in the distribution.

@c Get some inspiration from Starting Forth and Kelly&Spies.

@c excercises:
@c 1. take inches and convert to feet and inches.
@c 2. take temperature and convert from fahrenheight to celcius;
@c    may need to care about symmetric vs floored??
@c 3. take input line and do character substitution
@c    to encipher or decipher
@c 4. as above but work on a file for in and out
@c 5. take input line and convert to pig-latin 
@c
@c thing of sets of things to exercise then come up with
@c problems that need those things.


@c ******************************************************************
@node Literals in source code, Words, Introduction, Top
@chapter Literals in source code
@cindex Literals (in source code)

@cindex single-cell numbers, input format
@cindex input format for single-cell numbers
To push an integer number on the data stack, you write the number in source
code, e.g., @code{123}.  You can prefix the digits with @code{-} to indicate
a negative number, e.g. @code{-123}.  This works both inside colon
definitions and outside.  The number is interpreted according to the value
of @code{base} (@pxref{Number Conversion}).  The digits are @code{0} to
@code{9} and @code{a} (decimal 10) to @code{z} (decimal 35), but only digits
smaller than the base are recognized.  The conversion is case-insensitive,
so @code{A} and @code{a} are the same digit.

@cindex &-prefix for decimal numbers
@cindex #-prefix for decimal numbers
@cindex %-prefix for binary numbers
@cindex $-prefix for hexadecimal numbers
@cindex 0x-prefix for hexadecimal numbers
You can make the base explicit for the number by using a prefix:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{#} -- decimal
@item
@code{%} -- binary
@item
@code{$} -- hexadecimal
@item
@code{&} -- decimal (non-standard)
@item
@code{0x} -- hexadecimal, if base<33 (non-standard).
@end itemize

For combinations including base-prefix and sign, the standard order is to
have the base-prefix first (e.g., @code{#-123}); Gforth supports both
orders.

@cindex double-cell numbers, input format
@cindex input format for double-cell numbers
You can put a decimal point @code{.} at the end of a number (or,
non-standardly, anywhere else except before a prefix) to get a double-cell
integer (e.g., @code{#-123.} or @code{#-.123} (the same number)).  If users
experienced in another programming language see or write such a number
without base prefix (e.g., @code{-123.}), they may expect that the number
represents a floating-point value.  To clear up the confusion early, Gforth
warns of such usage; to avoid the warnings, the best approach is to always
write double numbers with a base prefix (e.g., @code{#-123.})

Here are some examples, with the equivalent decimal number shown after in
braces:

@code{$-41} (-65), @code{%1001101} (205), @code{%1001.0001} (145 - a
double-precision number), @code{#905} (905), @code{$abc} (2478), @code{$ABC}
(2478).

@cindex '-prefix for characters/code points
@cindex input format for characters/code points
You can get the numeric value of a (character) code point by surrounding the
character with @code{'} (e.g., @code{'a'}).  The trailing @code{'} is
required by the standard, but you can leave it away in Gforth.  Note that
this also works for non-ASCII characters.  For many uses, it is more useful
to have the character as a string rather than as a cell; see below for the
string syntax.

@cindex floating-point numbers, input format
@cindex input format for floating-point numbers
For floating-point numbers in Forth, you recognize them due to their
exponent.  I.e. @code{1.} is a double-cell integer, and @code{1e0} is a
floating-point number; the latter can be (and usually is) shortened to
@code{1e}.  Both the significand (the part before the @code{e} or @code{E})
and the exponent may have signs (including @code{+}); the significand must
contain at least one digit and may contain a decimal point, the exponent can
be empty.  Floating-point numbers always use decimal base for both
significand and exponent, and are only recognized when the base is decimal.
Examples are: @code{1e 1e0 1.e 1.e0 +1e+0} (which all represent the same
number) @code{+12.E-4}.

A Gforth extension (since 1.0) is to write a floating-point number in scaled
notation: It can optionally have a sign, then one or more digits, then use
one of the mostly SI-defined scaling symbols (aka metric prefixes) or
@code{%}, and then optionally more digits.  Here's the full list of scaling
symbols that Gforth accepts:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{Q} @code{e30} quetta 
@item
@code{R} @code{e27} ronna  
@item
@code{Y} @code{e24} yotta  
@item
@code{Z} @code{e21} zetta  
@item
@code{X} @code{e18} exa (not @code{E}) 
@item
@code{P} @code{e15} peta   
@item
@code{T} @code{e12} tera   
@item
@code{G} @code{e9} giga   
@item
@code{M} @code{e6} mega   
@item
@code{k} @code{e3} kilo   
@item
@code{h} @code{e2} hecto  
@item
@code{d} @code{e-1} deci   
@item
@code{%} @code{e-2} percent (not @code{c})
@item
@code{m} @code{e-3} milli  
@item
@code{u} @code{e-6} micro (not @code{μ})
@item
@code{n} @code{e-9} nano   
@item
@code{p} @code{e-12} pico   
@item
@code{f} @code{e-15} femto  
@item
@code{a} @code{e-18} atto   
@item
@code{z} @code{e-21} zepto  
@item
@code{y} @code{e-24} yocto  
@item
@code{r} @code{e-27} ronto  
@item
@code{q} @code{e-30} quecto 
@end itemize

Unlike most of the rest of Gforth, scaling symbols are treated
case-sensitively.  Using the scaled notation is equivalent to using a
decimal point instead of the scaling symbol and appending the exponential
notation at the end.  Examples of scaled notation: @code{6k5} (6500e)
@code{23%} (0.23e).

@cindex String input format
@cindex input format for strings
You can input a string by surrounding it with @code{"} (e.g. @code{"abc"},
@code{"a b"}).  The result is the starting address and byte (=char) count of
the string on the data stack.

You have to escape any @code{"} inside the string with @code{\} (e.g.,
@code{"double-quote->\"<-"}).  In addition, this string syntax supports all
the ways to write control characters that are supported by @code{s\"}
(@pxref{String and character literals}).  A disadvantage of this string
syntax is that it is non-standard; for standard programs, use @code{s\"}
instead.

@cindex environment variable input format
@cindex input format for environment variables
You can input an environment variable by first loading @file{rec-env.fs} and
then prefixing the environment variable with @code{$}, e.g., @code{$HOME};
the result is a string descriptor on the data stack in the format described
above.  This is equivalent to @code{"HOME" getenv}, i.e., the environment
variable is resolved at run-time.

@cindex xt input format
@cindex execution token input format
@cindex input format for execution tokens
@cindex @code{`} prefix of word
You can input an execution token (xt) of a word by prefixing the name of the
word with @code{`} (e.g., @code{`dup}).  An advantage over using @code{'} or
@code{[']} is you do not need to switch between them when copying and
pasting code from inside to outside a colon definition or vice versa.  A
disadvantage is that this syntax is non-standard.

@cindex nt input format
@cindex nt token input format
@cindex input format for name tokens
@cindex @code{``} prefix of word
You can input a name token (nt) of a word by prefixing the name of the word
with @code{``} (e.g., @code{``dup}).  This syntax is also non-standard.

@cindex body-relative address input format
@cindex input format for body-relative addresses
You can input a body address of a word by surrounding it with @code{<} and
@code{>} (e.g., @code{<spaces>}).  You can also input an address that is at
a positive offset from the body address (typically an address in that body),
by putting @code{+} and a number (see syntax above) between the word name
and the closing @code{>} (e.g., @code{<spaces+$15>}, @code{spaces+-3}).  You
will get the body address plus the number.  This non-standard feature exists
to allow copying and pasting the output of @code{...} (@pxref{Examining
data}).

@c !! rec-scope rec-meta rec-to

@c ******************************************************************
@node Words, Error messages, Literals in source code, Top
@chapter Forth Words
@cindex words

@menu
* Notation::
* Case insensitivity::
* Comments::
* Boolean Flags::
* Arithmetic::
* Stack Manipulation::
* Memory::
* Strings and Characters::
* Control Structures::
* Defining Words::
* Interpretation and Compilation Semantics::
* Tokens for Words::
* Compiling words::
* The Text Interpreter::
* The Input Stream::
* Word Lists::
* Environmental Queries::
* Files::
* Blocks::
* Other I/O::
* OS command line arguments::
* Locals::
* Structures::
* Object-oriented Forth::
* Regular Expressions::
* Programming Tools::
* Multitasker::
* C Interface::
* Assembler and Code Words::
* Carnal words::
* Passing Commands to the OS::
* Keeping track of Time::
* Miscellaneous Words::      
@end menu

@node Notation, Case insensitivity, Words, Words
@section Notation
@cindex notation of glossary entries
@cindex format of glossary entries
@cindex glossary notation format
@cindex word glossary entry format

The Forth words are described in this section in the glossary notation that
has become a de-facto standard for Forth texts:

@format
@i{word}     @i{Stack effect}   @i{wordset}   @i{pronunciation}
@end format
@i{Description}

@table @var
@item word
The name of the word.

@item Stack effect
@cindex stack effect
The stack effect is written in the notation @code{@i{before} -- @i{after}},
where @i{before} and @i{after} describe the top of stack entries before and
after the execution of the word. The rest of the stack is not touched by the
word. The top of stack is rightmost, i.e., a stack sequence is written as it
is typed in. Note that Gforth uses a separate floating point stack, but a
unified stack notation. Also, return stack effects are not shown in @i{stack
effect}, but in @i{Description}. The name of a stack item describes the type
and/or the function of the item. See below for a discussion of the types.

All words have two stack effects: A compile-time stack effect and a run-time
stack effect. The compile-time stack-effect of most words is @i{ -- }. If
the compile-time stack-effect of a word deviates from this standard
behaviour, or the word does other unusual things at compile time, both stack
effects are shown; otherwise only the run-time stack effect is shown.

Also note that in code templates or examples there can be comments in
parentheses that display the stack picture at this point; there is no
@code{--} in these places, because there is no before-after situation.

@cindex pronounciation of words
@item pronunciation
How the word is pronounced.

@cindex wordset
@cindex environment wordset
@item wordset
The wordset specifies whether a word has been standardized, it is an
environmental query string, or if it is a Gforth-specific word.  In the
latter case the wordset contains the string @code{gforth}, other wordset
names are either @code{environment} of refer to standard word sets.

The Forth standard is divided into several word sets. In theory, a standard
system need not support all of them, but in practice, serious systems on
non-tiny machines support almost all standardized words (some systems
require explicit loading of some word sets, however), so it does not
increase portability in practice to be parsimonious in using word sets.

For the Gforth-specific words, we have the following categories:

@table @code
@item gforth
@item gforth-@i{<version>}
We intend to permanently support this word in Gforth and it has been
available since Gforth @i{<version>} (possibly not as supported word at that
time).

@item gforth-experimental
This word is available in the present version and may turn into a permanent
word or may be removed in a future release of Gforth.  Feedback welcome.

@item gforth-internal
This word is an internal factor, not a supported word, and it may be removed
in a future release of Gforth.

@item gforth-obsolete
This word will be removed in a future release of Gforth.
@end table


@item Description
A description of the behaviour of the word.
@end table

@cindex types of stack items
@cindex stack item types
The type of a stack item is specified by the character(s) the name starts
with:

@table @code
@item f
@cindex @code{f}, stack item type
二値フラグ(Boolean flags)。 つまり @code{false} または @code{true}
@item c
@cindex @code{c}, stack item type
Char
@item w
@cindex @code{w}, stack item type
Cell, can contain an integer or an address
@item n
@cindex @code{n}, stack item type
符号付き整数
@item u
@cindex @code{u}, stack item type
符号なし整数
@item d
@cindex @code{d}, stack item type
double sized signed integer
@item ud
@cindex @code{ud}, stack item type
double sized unsigned integer
@item r
@cindex @code{r}, stack item type
浮動小数点数(Float)(FP スタック上に置かれる)
@item a-
@cindex @code{a_}, stack item type
セル揃えアドレス(Cell-aligned address)
@item c-
@cindex @code{c_}, stack item type
文字揃えアドレス(Char-aligned address)(注意: NTWindows NT では 文字(char) は 2
バイトになる場合があることに注意)
@item f-
@cindex @code{f_}, stack item type
Float-aligned address
@item df-
@cindex @code{df_}, stack item type
Address aligned for IEEE double precision float
@item sf-
@cindex @code{sf_}, stack item type
Address aligned for IEEE single precision float
@item xt
@cindex @code{xt}, stack item type
実行トークン(Execution token)。 セルと同一サイズ
@item wid
@cindex @code{wid}, stack item type
Word list ID, same size as Cell
@item ior, wior
@cindex ior type description
@cindex wior type description
I/O result code, cell-sized.  In Gforth, you can @code{throw} iors.
@item f83name
@cindex @code{f83name}, stack item type
Pointer to a name structure
@item "
@cindex @code{"}, stack item type
string in the input stream (not on the stack). The terminating character is
a blank by default. If it is not a blank, it is shown in @code{<>} quotes.
@end table

@comment ----------------------------------------------
@node Case insensitivity, Comments, Notation, Words
@section Case insensitivity
@cindex case sensitivity
@cindex upper and lower case

Gforth is case-insensitive; you can enter definitions and invoke Standard
words using upper, lower or mixed case (however, @pxref{core-idef,
Implementation-defined options, Implementation-defined options}).

Standard Forth only @i{requires} implementations to recognise Standard words
when they are typed entirely in upper case. Therefore, a Standard program
must use upper case for all Standard words. You can use whatever case you
like for words that you define, but in a Standard program you have to use
the words in the same case that you defined them.

Gforth supports case sensitivity through @code{cs-wordlist}s (case-sensitive
wordlists, @pxref{Word Lists}).

Two people have asked how to convert Gforth to be case-sensitive; while we
think this is a bad idea, you can change all wordlists into tables like
this:

@example
' table-find forth-wordlist wordlist-map @ !
@end example

Note that you now have to type the predefined words in the same case that we
defined them, which are varying.  You may want to convert them to your
favourite case before doing this operation (I won't explain how, because if
you are even contemplating doing this, you'd better have enough knowledge of
Forth systems to know this already).

@node Comments, Boolean Flags, Case insensitivity, Words
@section Comments
@cindex comments

Forth supports two styles of comment; the traditional @i{in-line} comment,
@code{(} and its modern cousin, the @i{comment to end of line}; @code{\}.


@findex ( ( @var{ compilation 'ccc<close-paren>' -- ; run-time --   } ) core,file
@cindex @code{(}
@kindex (
@format
@code{(} ( @i{compilation 'ccc<close-paren>' -- ; run-time --  }) core,file ``paren''
@end format
Comment, usually till the next @code{)}: parse and discard all subsequent
characters in the parse area until ")" is encountered. During interactive
input, an end-of-line also acts as a comment terminator. For file input, it
does not; if the end-of-file is encountered whilst parsing for the ")"
delimiter, Gforth will generate a warning.


@findex \ ( @var{ compilation 'ccc<newline>' -- ; run-time --   } ) core-ext,block-ext
@cindex @code{\}
@kindex \
@format
@code{\} ( @i{compilation 'ccc<newline>' -- ; run-time --  }) core-ext,block-ext ``backslash''
@end format
Comment until the end of line: parse and discard all remaining characters in
the parse area, except while @code{load}ing from a block: while
@code{load}ing from a block, parse and discard all remaining characters in
the 64-byte line.


@findex \G ( @var{ compilation 'ccc<newline>' -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{\G}
@kindex \G
@format
@code{\G} ( @i{compilation 'ccc<newline>' -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-0.2 ``backslash-gee''
@end format
Equivalent to @code{\} but used as a tag to annotate definition comments
into documentation.




@node Boolean Flags, Arithmetic, Comments, Words
@section Boolean Flags
@cindex Boolean flags

@c on and off to Memory? 
@c true and false to "Bitwise operations" or "Numeric comparison"?
A Boolean flag is cell-sized. A cell with all bits clear represents the flag
@code{false} and a flag with all bits set represents the flag
@code{true}. Words that check a flag (for example, @code{IF}) will treat a
cell that has @i{any} bit set as @code{true}.

@findex true ( @var{ -- f   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{true}
@kindex true
@format
@code{true} ( @i{-- f  }) core-ext ``true''
@end format
@code{Constant} -- @i{f} is a cell with all bits set.


@findex false ( @var{ -- f   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{false}
@kindex false
@format
@code{false} ( @i{-- f  }) core-ext ``false''
@end format
@code{Constant} -- @i{f} is a cell with all bits clear.


@findex on ( @var{ a-addr --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{on}
@kindex on
@format
@code{on} ( @i{a-addr --  }) gforth-0.2 ``on''
@end format
Set the (value of the) variable at @i{a-addr} to @code{true}.


@findex off ( @var{ a-addr --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{off}
@kindex off
@format
@code{off} ( @i{a-addr --  }) gforth-0.2 ``off''
@end format
Set the (value of the) variable at @i{a-addr} to @code{false}.


@findex select ( @var{ u1 u2 f -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{select}
@kindex select
@format
@code{select} ( @i{u1 u2 f -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``select''
@end format
If @i{f} is false, @i{u} is @i{u2}, otherwise @i{u1}.


@node Arithmetic, Stack Manipulation, Boolean Flags, Words
@section Arithmetic
@cindex arithmetic words

@cindex division with potentially negative operands
Forth arithmetic is not checked, i.e., you will not hear about integer
overflow on addition or multiplication, you may hear about division by zero
if you are lucky. The operator is written after the operands, but the
operands are still in the original order. I.e., the infix @code{2-1}
corresponds to @code{2 1 -}. Forth offers a variety of division
operators. If you perform division with potentially negative operands, you
do not want to use @code{/} or @code{/mod} with its implementation-defined
behaviour, but, e.g., @code{/f}, @code{/modf} or @code{fm/mod}
(@pxref{Integer division}).

@menu
* Single precision::
* Double precision::         2倍長整数演算
* Mixed precision::          1倍長整数と2倍長整数の操作
* Integer division::
* Two-stage integer division::
* Bitwise operations::
* Numeric comparison::
* Floating Point::           
@end menu

@node Single precision, Double precision, Arithmetic, Arithmetic
@subsection Single precision
@cindex single precision arithmetic words

@c !! cell undefined

By default, numbers in Forth are single-precision integers that are one cell
in size. They can be signed or unsigned, depending upon how you treat
them. For the rules used by the text interpreter for recognising
single-precision integers see @ref{Number Conversion}.

These words are all defined for signed operands, but some of them also work
for unsigned numbers: @code{+}, @code{1+}, @code{-}, @code{1-}, @code{*}.

@findex + ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) core
@cindex @code{+}
@kindex +
@format
@code{+} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) core ``plus''
@end format

@findex 1+ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{1+}
@kindex 1+
@format
@code{1+} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``one-plus''
@end format

@findex under+ ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n n2  } ) gforth-0.3
@cindex @code{under+}
@kindex under+
@format
@code{under+} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n n2 }) gforth-0.3 ``under-plus''
@end format
add @i{n3} to @i{n1} (giving @i{n})

@findex - ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) core
@cindex @code{-}
@kindex -
@format
@code{-} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) core ``minus''
@end format

@findex 1- ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{1-}
@kindex 1-
@format
@code{1-} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``one-minus''
@end format

@findex * ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) core
@cindex @code{*}
@kindex *
@format
@code{*} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) core ``star''
@end format

@findex negate ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{negate}
@kindex negate
@format
@code{negate} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``negate''
@end format

@findex abs ( @var{ n -- u  } ) core
@cindex @code{abs}
@kindex abs
@format
@code{abs} ( @i{n -- u }) core ``abs''
@end format

@findex min ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) core
@cindex @code{min}
@kindex min
@format
@code{min} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) core ``min''
@end format

@findex max ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) core
@cindex @code{max}
@kindex max
@format
@code{max} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) core ``max''
@end format

@findex umin ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{umin}
@kindex umin
@format
@code{umin} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u }) gforth-0.5 ``umin''
@end format

@findex umax ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{umax}
@kindex umax
@format
@code{umax} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``umax''
@end format


@node Double precision, Mixed precision, Single precision, Arithmetic
@subsection Double precision
@cindex double precision arithmetic words

For the rules used by the text interpreter for recognising double-precision
integers, see @ref{Number Conversion}.

A double precision number is represented by a cell pair, with the most
significant cell at the TOS. It is trivial to convert an unsigned single to
a double: simply push a @code{0} onto the TOS. Since numbers are represented
by Gforth using 2's complement arithmetic, converting a signed single to a
(signed) double requires sign-extension across the most significant
cell. This can be achieved using @code{s>d}. The moral of the story is that
you cannot convert a number without knowing whether it represents an
unsigned or a signed number.

These words are all defined for signed operands, but some of them also work
for unsigned numbers: @code{d+}, @code{d-}.

@findex s>d ( @var{ n -- d   } ) core
@cindex @code{s>d}
@kindex s>d
@format
@code{s>d} ( @i{n -- d  }) core ``s-to-d''
@end format

@findex d>s ( @var{ d -- n   } ) double
@cindex @code{d>s}
@kindex d>s
@format
@code{d>s} ( @i{d -- n  }) double ``d-to-s''
@end format

@findex d+ ( @var{ ud1 ud2 -- ud  } ) double
@cindex @code{d+}
@kindex d+
@format
@code{d+} ( @i{ud1 ud2 -- ud }) double ``d-plus''
@end format

@findex d- ( @var{ d1 d2 -- d  } ) double
@cindex @code{d-}
@kindex d-
@format
@code{d-} ( @i{d1 d2 -- d }) double ``d-minus''
@end format

@findex dnegate ( @var{ d1 -- d2  } ) double
@cindex @code{dnegate}
@kindex dnegate
@format
@code{dnegate} ( @i{d1 -- d2 }) double ``d-negate''
@end format

@findex dabs ( @var{ d -- ud   } ) double
@cindex @code{dabs}
@kindex dabs
@format
@code{dabs} ( @i{d -- ud  }) double ``d-abs''
@end format

@findex dmin ( @var{ d1 d2 -- d   } ) double
@cindex @code{dmin}
@kindex dmin
@format
@code{dmin} ( @i{d1 d2 -- d  }) double ``d-min''
@end format

@findex dmax ( @var{ d1 d2 -- d   } ) double
@cindex @code{dmax}
@kindex dmax
@format
@code{dmax} ( @i{d1 d2 -- d  }) double ``d-max''
@end format



@node Mixed precision, Integer division, Double precision, Arithmetic
@subsection Mixed precision
@cindex mixed precision arithmetic words

@findex m+ ( @var{ d1 n -- d2  } ) double
@cindex @code{m+}
@kindex m+
@format
@code{m+} ( @i{d1 n -- d2 }) double ``m-plus''
@end format

@findex m* ( @var{ n1 n2 -- d  } ) core
@cindex @code{m*}
@kindex m*
@format
@code{m*} ( @i{n1 n2 -- d }) core ``m-star''
@end format

@findex um* ( @var{ u1 u2 -- ud  } ) core
@cindex @code{um*}
@kindex um*
@format
@code{um*} ( @i{u1 u2 -- ud }) core ``u-m-star''
@end format


@node Integer division, Two-stage integer division, Mixed precision, Arithmetic
@subsection Integer division
@cindex dividing integers
@cindex modulus
@cindex remainder
@cindex Floating-point unidentified fault
@cindex Division by zero
@cindex Result out of range

Below you find a considerable number of words for dealing with divisions.  A
major difference between them is in dealing with signed division: Do the
words support signed division (those with the @code{U} prefix do not)?

@cindex floored division
@cindex symmetric division
If they do, do they round towards negative infinity (floored division,
suffix @code{F}), or towards 0 (symmetric division, suffix @code{S}).  The
standard leaves the issue implementation-defined for most standard words
(@code{/ mod /mod */ */mod m*/}), and different systems have made different
choices.  Gforth implements these words as floored (since Gforth 0.7).
There is only a difference between floored and symmetric division if the
dividend and the divisor have different signs, and the dividend is not a
multiple of the divisor.  The following table illustrates the results:

@example
                      floored          symmetric
dividend divisor remainder quotient remainder quotient
    10      7           3   1              3   1
   -10      7           4  -2             -3  -1
    10     -7          -4  -2              3  -1
   -10     -7          -3   1             -3   1
@end example

The common case where floored vs.@: symmetric makes a difference is when
dividends n1 with varying sign are divided by the same positive divisor n2;
in that case you usually want floored division, because then the remainder
is always positive and does not change sign depending on the dividend; also,
with floored division, the quotient always increases by 1 when n1 increases
by n2, while with symmetric division there is no increase in the quotient
for -n2<n1<n2 (the quotient is 0 in this range).

In any case, if you divide numbers where floored vs.@: symmetric makes a
difference, you should think about which variant is the right one for you,
and then use either the appropriately suffixed Gforth words, or the standard
words @code{fm/mod} or @code{sm/rem}.

Single-by-single-cell division:

@findex / ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n   } ) core
@cindex @code{/}
@kindex /
@format
@code{/} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n  }) core ``slash''
@end format
n=n1/n2


@findex /s ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/s}
@kindex /s
@format
@code{/s} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-s''
@end format

@findex /f ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/f}
@kindex /f
@format
@code{/f} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-f''
@end format

@findex u/ ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u/}
@kindex u/
@format
@code{u/} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``u-slash''
@end format

@findex mod ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n   } ) core
@cindex @code{mod}
@kindex mod
@format
@code{mod} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n  }) core ``mod''
@end format
n is the modulus of n1/n2


@findex mods ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{mods}
@kindex mods
@format
@code{mods} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``mod-s''
@end format

@findex modf ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{modf}
@kindex modf
@format
@code{modf} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``modf''
@end format

@findex umod ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{umod}
@kindex umod
@format
@code{umod} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``umod''
@end format

@findex /mod ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n3 n4   } ) core
@cindex @code{/mod}
@kindex /mod
@format
@code{/mod} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n3 n4  }) core ``slash-mod''
@end format
n1=n2*n4+n3; n3 is the modulus, n4 the quotient.


@findex /mods ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n3 n4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/mods}
@kindex /mods
@format
@code{/mods} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n3 n4 }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-mod-s''
@end format
n3 is the remainder, n4 the quotient

@findex /modf ( @var{ n1 n2 -- n3 n4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/modf}
@kindex /modf
@format
@code{/modf} ( @i{n1 n2 -- n3 n4 }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-mod-f''
@end format
n3 is the modulus, n4 the quotient

@findex u/mod ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u3 u4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u/mod}
@kindex u/mod
@format
@code{u/mod} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u3 u4 }) gforth-1.0 ``u-slash-mod''
@end format
u3 is the modulus, u4 the quotient


Double-by-single-cell division with single-cell results; these words are
roughly as fast as the words above on some architectures (e.g., AMD64), but
much slower on others (e.g., an order of magnitude on various Aarch64 CPUs).

@findex fm/mod ( @var{ d1 n1 -- n2 n3  } ) core
@cindex @code{fm/mod}
@kindex fm/mod
@format
@code{fm/mod} ( @i{d1 n1 -- n2 n3 }) core ``f-m-slash-mod''
@end format
Floored division: @i{d1} = @i{n3}*@i{n1}+@i{n2}, @i{n1}>@i{n2}>=0 or
0>=@i{n2}>@i{n1}.

@findex sm/rem ( @var{ d1 n1 -- n2 n3  } ) core
@cindex @code{sm/rem}
@kindex sm/rem
@format
@code{sm/rem} ( @i{d1 n1 -- n2 n3 }) core ``s-m-slash-rem''
@end format
Symmetric division: @i{d1} = @i{n3}*@i{n1}+@i{n2}, sign(@i{n2})=sign(@i{d1})
or 0.

@findex um/mod ( @var{ ud u1 -- u2 u3  } ) core
@cindex @code{um/mod}
@kindex um/mod
@format
@code{um/mod} ( @i{ud u1 -- u2 u3 }) core ``u-m-slash-mod''
@end format
ud=u3*u1+u2, 0<=u2<u1

@findex du/mod ( @var{ d u -- n u1  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{du/mod}
@kindex du/mod
@format
@code{du/mod} ( @i{d u -- n u1 }) gforth-1.0 ``du-slash-mod''
@end format
d=n*u+u1, 0<=u1<u; PolyForth style mixed division

@findex */ ( @var{ ( n1 n2 n3 -- n4   } ) core
@cindex @code{*/}
@kindex */
@format
@code{*/} ( @i{( n1 n2 n3 -- n4  }) core ``star-slash''
@end format
n4=(n1*n2)/n3, with the intermediate result being double


@findex */s ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*/s}
@kindex */s
@format
@code{*/s} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n4 }) gforth-1.0 ``star-slash-s''
@end format
n4=(n1*n2)/n3, with the intermediate result being double

@findex */f ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*/f}
@kindex */f
@format
@code{*/f} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n4 }) gforth-1.0 ``star-slash-f''
@end format
n4=(n1*n2)/n3, with the intermediate result being double

@findex u*/ ( @var{ u1 u2 u3 -- u4  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u*/}
@kindex u*/
@format
@code{u*/} ( @i{u1 u2 u3 -- u4 }) gforth-1.0 ``u-star-slash''
@end format
u4=(u1*u2)/u3, with the intermediate result being double.

@findex */mod ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5   } ) core
@cindex @code{*/mod}
@kindex */mod
@format
@code{*/mod} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5  }) core ``star-slash-mod''
@end format
n1*n2=n3*n5+n4, with the intermediate result (n1*n2) being double; n4 is the
modulus, n5 the quotient.


@findex */mods ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*/mods}
@kindex */mods
@format
@code{*/mods} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5 }) gforth-1.0 ``star-slash-mod-s''
@end format
n1*n2=n3*n5+n4, with the intermediate result (n1*n2) being double; n4 is the
remainder, n5 the quotient

@findex */modf ( @var{ n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*/modf}
@kindex */modf
@format
@code{*/modf} ( @i{n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5 }) gforth-1.0 ``star-slash-mod-f''
@end format
n1*n2=n3*n5+n4, with the intermediate result (n1*n2) being double; n4 is the
modulus, n5 the quotient

@findex u*/mod ( @var{ u1 u2 u3 -- u4 u5  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u*/mod}
@kindex u*/mod
@format
@code{u*/mod} ( @i{u1 u2 u3 -- u4 u5 }) gforth-1.0 ``u-star-slash-mod''
@end format
u1*u2=u3*u5+u4, with the intermediate result (u1*u2) being double.


Division with double-cell results; these words are much slower than the
words above.

@findex ud/mod ( @var{ ud1 u2 -- urem udquot   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ud/mod}
@kindex ud/mod
@format
@code{ud/mod} ( @i{ud1 u2 -- urem udquot  }) gforth-0.2 ``ud/mod''
@end format
divide unsigned double @i{ud1} by @i{u2}, resulting in a unsigned double
quotient @i{udquot} and a single remainder @i{urem}.


@findex m*/ ( @var{ d1 n2 u3 -- dquot   } ) double
@cindex @code{m*/}
@kindex m*/
@format
@code{m*/} ( @i{d1 n2 u3 -- dquot  }) double ``m-star-slash''
@end format
dquot=(d1*n2)/u3, with the intermediate result being triple-precision.  In
ANS Forth u3 can only be a positive signed number.



You can use the following environmental query @code{floored}
(@pxref{Environmental Queries}) to learn whether @code{/ mod /mod */ */mod
m*/} use floored or symmetric division.

@cindex Floating-point unidentified fault (on integer division)
@cindex Division by zero
@cindex Result out of range (on integer division)
One other aspect of the integer division words is that most of them can
overflow, and division by zero is mathematically undefined.  What happens if
you hit one of these conditions depends on the engine, the hardware, and the
operating system: The engine @code{gforth} tries hard to throw the
appropriate error -10 (Division by zero) or -11 (Result out of range), but
on some platforms throws -55 (Floating-point unidentified fault).  The
engine @code{gforth-fast} may produce an inappropriate throw code (and error
message), or may produce no error, just produce a bogus value.  I.e., you
should not bet on such conditions being thrown, but for quicker debugging
@code{gforth} catches more and produces more accurate errors than
@code{gforth-fast}.


@node Two-stage integer division, Bitwise operations, Integer division, Arithmetic
@subsection Two-stage integer division
@cindex dividing many integers with the same divisor
@cindex reciprocal of integer

On most hardware, multiplication is significantly faster than division.  So
if you have to divide many numbers by the same divisor, it is usually faster
to determine the reciprocal of the divisor once and multiply the numbers
with the reciprocal.  For integers, this is tricky, so Gforth packages this
work into the words described in this section.

Let's start with an example: You want to divide all elements of an array of
cells by the same number n.  A straightforward way to implement this is:

@example
: array/ ( addr u n -- )
  -rot cells bounds u+do
    i @@ over / i !
  1 cells +loop
  drop ;
@end example

A more efficient version looks like this:

@example
: array/ ( addr u n -- )
  @{: | reci[ staged/-size ] :@}
  reci[ /f-stage1m
  cells bounds u+do
    i @@ reci[ /f-stage2m i !
  1 cells +loop ;
@end example

This example first creates a local buffer @code{reci[} with size
@code{staged/-size} for storing the reciprocal data.  Then @code{/f-stage1m}
computes the reciprocal of @i{n} and stores it in @code{reci[}.  Finally,
inside the loop @code{/f-stage2m} uses the data in @code{reci[} to compute
the quotient.

There are some limitations: Only positive divisors are supported for
@code{/f-stage1m}; for @code{u/-stage1m} you can use a divisor of 2 or
higher.  You get an error if you try to use an unsupported divisor.  You
must initalize the reciprocal buffer for the floored second-stage words with
@code{/f-stage1m} and for the unsigned second-stage words with
@code{u/-stage1m}.  You must not modify the reciprocal buffer between the
first stage and the second stage; basically, don't treat it as a memory
buffer, but as something that is only mutable by the first stage; the point
of this rule is that future versions of Gforth will not consider aliasing of
this buffer.

The words are:

@findex staged/-size ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{staged/-size}
@kindex staged/-size
@format
@code{staged/-size} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``staged-slash-size''
@end format
Size of buffer for @code{u/-stage1m} or @code{/f-stage1m}.


@findex /f-stage1m ( @var{ n addr-reci --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/f-stage1m}
@kindex /f-stage1m
@format
@code{/f-stage1m} ( @i{n addr-reci --  }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-f-stage1m''
@end format
Compute the reciprocal of @i{n} and store it in the buffer @i{addr-reci} of
size @code{staged/-size}.  Throws an error if @i{n}<1.


@findex /f-stage2m ( @var{ n1 a-reci -- nquotient  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/f-stage2m}
@kindex /f-stage2m
@format
@code{/f-stage2m} ( @i{n1 a-reci -- nquotient }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-f-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Nquotient} is the result of dividing @i{n1} by the divisor represented by
@i{a-reci}, which was computed by @code{/f-stage1m}.

@findex modf-stage2m ( @var{ n1 a-reci -- umodulus  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{modf-stage2m}
@kindex modf-stage2m
@format
@code{modf-stage2m} ( @i{n1 a-reci -- umodulus }) gforth-1.0 ``mod-f-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Umodulus} is the remainder of dividing @i{n1} by the divisor represented
by @i{a-reci}, which was computed by @code{/f-stage1m}.

@findex /modf-stage2m ( @var{ n1 a-reci -- umodulus nquotient  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/modf-stage2m}
@kindex /modf-stage2m
@format
@code{/modf-stage2m} ( @i{n1 a-reci -- umodulus nquotient }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-mod-f-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Nquotient} is the quotient and @i{umodulus} is the remainder of dividing
@i{n1} by the divisor represented by @i{a-reci}, which was computed by
@code{/f-stage1m}.

@findex u/-stage1m ( @var{ u addr-reci --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u/-stage1m}
@kindex u/-stage1m
@format
@code{u/-stage1m} ( @i{u addr-reci --  }) gforth-1.0 ``u-slash-stage1m''
@end format
Compute the reciprocal of @i{u} and store it in the buffer @i{addr-reci} of
size @code{staged/-size}.  Throws an error if @i{u}<2.


@findex u/-stage2m ( @var{ u1 a-reci -- uquotient  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u/-stage2m}
@kindex u/-stage2m
@format
@code{u/-stage2m} ( @i{u1 a-reci -- uquotient }) gforth-1.0 ``u-slash-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Uquotient} is the result of dividing @i{u1} by the divisor represented by
@i{a-reci}, which was computed by @code{u/-stage1m}.

@findex umod-stage2m ( @var{ u1 a-reci -- umodulus  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{umod-stage2m}
@kindex umod-stage2m
@format
@code{umod-stage2m} ( @i{u1 a-reci -- umodulus }) gforth-1.0 ``u-mod-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Umodulus} is the remainder of dividing @i{u1} by the divisor represented
by @i{a-reci}, which was computed by @code{u/-stage1m}.

@findex u/mod-stage2m ( @var{ u1 a-reci -- umodulus uquotient  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{u/mod-stage2m}
@kindex u/mod-stage2m
@format
@code{u/mod-stage2m} ( @i{u1 a-reci -- umodulus uquotient }) gforth-1.0 ``u-slash-mod-stage2m''
@end format
@i{Uquotient} is the quotient and @i{umodulus} is the remainder of dividing
@i{u1} by the divisor represented by @i{a-reci}, which was computed by
@code{u/-stage1m}.


Gforth currently does not support staged symmetrical division.

You can recover the divisor from (the address of) a reciprocal with
@code{staged/-divisor @@}:

@findex staged/-divisor ( @var{ addr1 -- addr2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{staged/-divisor}
@kindex staged/-divisor
@format
@code{staged/-divisor} ( @i{addr1 -- addr2  }) gforth-1.0 ``staged-slash-divisor''
@end format
@i{Addr1} is the address of a reciprocal, @i{addr2} is the address
containing the divisor from which the reciprocal was computed.



This can be useful when looking at the decompiler output of Gforth: a
division by a constant is often compiled to a literal containing the address
of a reciprocal followed by a second-stage word.

The performance impact of using these words strongly depends on the
architecture (does it have hardware division?) and the specific
implementation (how fast is hardware division?), but just to give you an
idea about the relative performance of these words, here are the cycles per
iteration of a microbenchmark (which performs the mentioned word once per
iteration) on two AMD64 implementations; the @i{norm} column shows the
normal division word (e.g., @code{u/}), while the @i{stg2} column shows the
corresponding stage2 word (e.g., @code{u/-stage2m}):

@example
 Skylake              Zen2
norm stg2           norm stg2
41.3 15.8 u/	    35.2 21.4 u/	   
39.8 19.7 umod	    36.9 25.8 umod	   
44.0 25.3 u/mod	    43.0 33.9 u/mod	   
48.7 16.9 /f	    36.2 22.5 /f	   
47.9 20.5 modf	    37.9 27.1 modf	   
53.0 24.6 /modf	    45.8 35.4 /modf	   
    227.2 u/stage1      101.9 u/stage1
    159.8 /fstage1       97.7 /fstage1
@end example


@node Bitwise operations, Numeric comparison, Two-stage integer division, Arithmetic
@subsection Bitwise operations
@cindex bitwise operation words


@findex and ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w  } ) core
@cindex @code{and}
@kindex and
@format
@code{and} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w }) core ``and''
@end format

@findex or ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w  } ) core
@cindex @code{or}
@kindex or
@format
@code{or} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w }) core ``or''
@end format

@findex xor ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w  } ) core
@cindex @code{xor}
@kindex xor
@format
@code{xor} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w }) core ``x-or''
@end format

@findex invert ( @var{ w1 -- w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{invert}
@kindex invert
@format
@code{invert} ( @i{w1 -- w2 }) core ``invert''
@end format

@findex mux ( @var{ u1 u2 u3 -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{mux}
@kindex mux
@format
@code{mux} ( @i{u1 u2 u3 -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``mux''
@end format
Multiplex: For every bit in @i{u3}: for a 1 bit, select the corresponding
bit from @i{u1}, otherwise the corresponding bit from @i{u2}.  E.g.,
@code{%0011 %1100 %1010 mux} gives @code{%0110}

@findex lshift ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) core
@cindex @code{lshift}
@kindex lshift
@format
@code{lshift} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) core ``l-shift''
@end format
Shift @i{u1} left by @i{u} bits.

@findex rshift ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) core
@cindex @code{rshift}
@kindex rshift
@format
@code{rshift} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) core ``r-shift''
@end format
Shift @i{u1} (cell) right by @i{u} bits, filling the shifted-in bits with
zero (logical/unsigned shift).

@findex arshift ( @var{ n1 u -- n2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{arshift}
@kindex arshift
@format
@code{arshift} ( @i{n1 u -- n2 }) gforth-1.0 ``ar-shift''
@end format
Shift @i{n1} (cell) right by @i{u} bits, filling the shifted-in bits from
the sign bit of @i{n1} (arithmetic shift).

@findex dlshift ( @var{ ud1 u -- ud2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dlshift}
@kindex dlshift
@format
@code{dlshift} ( @i{ud1 u -- ud2 }) gforth-1.0 ``dlshift''
@end format
Shift @i{ud1} (double-cell) left by @i{u} bits.

@findex drshift ( @var{ ud1 u -- ud2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{drshift}
@kindex drshift
@format
@code{drshift} ( @i{ud1 u -- ud2 }) gforth-1.0 ``drshift''
@end format
Shift @i{ud1} (double-cell) right by @i{u} bits, filling the shifted-in bits
with zero (logical/unsigned shift).

@findex darshift ( @var{ d1 u -- d2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{darshift}
@kindex darshift
@format
@code{darshift} ( @i{d1 u -- d2 }) gforth-1.0 ``darshift''
@end format
Shift @i{d1} (double-cell) right by @i{u} bits, filling the shifted-in bits
from the sign bit of @i{d1} (arithmetic shift).

@findex 2* ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2*}
@kindex 2*
@format
@code{2*} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``two-star''
@end format
Shift left by 1; also works on unsigned numbers

@findex 2/ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2/}
@kindex 2/
@format
@code{2/} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``two-slash''
@end format
Arithmetic shift right by 1.  For signed numbers this is a floored division
by 2 (note that @code{/} not necessarily floors).

@findex d2* ( @var{ d1 -- d2  } ) double
@cindex @code{d2*}
@kindex d2*
@format
@code{d2*} ( @i{d1 -- d2 }) double ``d-two-star''
@end format
Shift double-cell left by 1; also works on unsigned numbers

@findex d2/ ( @var{ d1 -- d2  } ) double
@cindex @code{d2/}
@kindex d2/
@format
@code{d2/} ( @i{d1 -- d2 }) double ``d-two-slash''
@end format
Arithmetic shift right by 1.  For signed numbers this is a floored division
by 2.

@findex >pow2 ( @var{ u1 -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{>pow2}
@kindex >pow2
@format
@code{>pow2} ( @i{u1 -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``to-pow2''
@end format
@i{u2} is the lowest power-of-2 number with @i{u2>=u1}.

@findex log2 ( @var{ u -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{log2}
@kindex log2
@format
@code{log2} ( @i{u -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``log2''
@end format
@i{N} is the rounded-down binary logarithm of @i{u}, i.e., the index of the
first set bit; if @i{u}=0, @i{n}=-1.

@findex pow2? ( @var{ u -- f   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{pow2?}
@kindex pow2?
@format
@code{pow2?} ( @i{u -- f  }) gforth-1.0 ``pow-two-query''
@end format
@i{f} is true iff @i{u} is a power of two, i.e., there is exactly one bit
set in @i{u}.


@findex ctz ( @var{ x -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ctz}
@kindex ctz
@format
@code{ctz} ( @i{x -- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-t-z''
@end format
count trailing zeros in binary representation of x



Unlike most other operations, rotation of narrower units cannot easily be
synthesized from rotation of wider units, so using cell-wide and double-wide
rotation operations means that the results depend on the cell width.  For
published algorithms or cell-width-independent results, you usually need to
use a fixed-width rotation operation.

@findex wrol ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wrol}
@kindex wrol
@format
@code{wrol} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``wrol''
@end format
Rotate the least significant 16 bits of @i{u1} left by @i{u} bits, set the
other bits to 0.

@findex wror ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wror}
@kindex wror
@format
@code{wror} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``wror''
@end format
Rotate the least significant 16 bits of @i{u1} right by @i{u} bits, set the
other bits to 0.

@findex lrol ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lrol}
@kindex lrol
@format
@code{lrol} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``lrol''
@end format
Rotate the least significant 32 bits of @i{u1} left by @i{u} bits, set the
other bits to 0.

@findex lror ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lror}
@kindex lror
@format
@code{lror} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``lror''
@end format
Rotate the least significant 32 bits of @i{u1} right by @i{u} bits, set the
other bits to 0.

@findex rol ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{rol}
@kindex rol
@format
@code{rol} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``rol''
@end format
Rotate all bits of @i{u1} left by @i{u} bits.

@findex ror ( @var{ u1 u -- u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ror}
@kindex ror
@format
@code{ror} ( @i{u1 u -- u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``ror''
@end format
Rotate all bits of @i{u1} right by @i{u} bits.

@findex drol ( @var{ ud1 u -- ud2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{drol}
@kindex drol
@format
@code{drol} ( @i{ud1 u -- ud2 }) gforth-1.0 ``drol''
@end format
Rotate all bits of @i{ud1} (double-cell) left by @i{u} bits.

@findex dror ( @var{ ud1 u -- ud2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dror}
@kindex dror
@format
@code{dror} ( @i{ud1 u -- ud2 }) gforth-1.0 ``dror''
@end format
Rotate all bits of @i{ud1} (double-cell) right by @i{u} bits.


@node Numeric comparison, Floating Point, Bitwise operations, Arithmetic
@subsection Numeric comparison
@cindex numeric comparison words

Note that the words that compare for equality (@code{= <> 0= 0<> d= d<> d0=
d0<>}) work for for both signed and unsigned numbers.

@findex < ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{<}
@kindex <
@format
@code{<} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) core ``less-than''
@end format

@findex <= ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{<=}
@kindex <=
@format
@code{<=} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex <> ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{<>}
@kindex <>
@format
@code{<>} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) core-ext ``not-equals''
@end format

@findex = ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{=}
@kindex =
@format
@code{=} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) core ``equals''
@end format

@findex > ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{>}
@kindex >
@format
@code{>} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) core ``greater-than''
@end format

@findex >= ( @var{ n1 n2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>=}
@kindex >=
@format
@code{>=} ( @i{n1 n2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex 0< ( @var{ n -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{0<}
@kindex 0<
@format
@code{0<} ( @i{n -- f }) core ``zero-less-than''
@end format

@findex 0<= ( @var{ n -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{0<=}
@kindex 0<=
@format
@code{0<=} ( @i{n -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``zero-less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex 0<> ( @var{ n -- f  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{0<>}
@kindex 0<>
@format
@code{0<>} ( @i{n -- f }) core-ext ``zero-not-equals''
@end format

@findex 0= ( @var{ n -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{0=}
@kindex 0=
@format
@code{0=} ( @i{n -- f }) core ``zero-equals''
@end format

@findex 0> ( @var{ n -- f  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{0>}
@kindex 0>
@format
@code{0>} ( @i{n -- f }) core-ext ``zero-greater-than''
@end format

@findex 0>= ( @var{ n -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{0>=}
@kindex 0>=
@format
@code{0>=} ( @i{n -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``zero-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex u< ( @var{ u1 u2 -- f  } ) core
@cindex @code{u<}
@kindex u<
@format
@code{u<} ( @i{u1 u2 -- f }) core ``u-less-than''
@end format

@findex u<= ( @var{ u1 u2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{u<=}
@kindex u<=
@format
@code{u<=} ( @i{u1 u2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``u-less-or-equal''
@end format

@c u<> and u= exist but are the same as <> and =
@c doc-u<>
@c doc-u=
@findex u> ( @var{ u1 u2 -- f  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{u>}
@kindex u>
@format
@code{u>} ( @i{u1 u2 -- f }) core-ext ``u-greater-than''
@end format

@findex u>= ( @var{ u1 u2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{u>=}
@kindex u>=
@format
@code{u>=} ( @i{u1 u2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``u-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex within ( @var{ u1 u2 u3 -- f  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{within}
@kindex within
@format
@code{within} ( @i{u1 u2 u3 -- f }) core-ext ``within''
@end format
u2<u3 and u1 in [u2,u3) or: u2>=u3 and u1 not in [u3,u2).  This works for
unsigned and signed numbers (but not a mixture).  Another way to think about
this word is to consider the numbers as a circle (wrapping around from
@code{max-u} to 0 for unsigned, and from @code{max-n} to min-n for signed
numbers); now consider the range from u2 towards increasing numbers up to
and excluding u3 (giving an empty range if u2=u3); if u1 is in this range,
@code{within} returns true.


@findex d< ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) double
@cindex @code{d<}
@kindex d<
@format
@code{d<} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) double ``d-less-than''
@end format

@findex d<= ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d<=}
@kindex d<=
@format
@code{d<=} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex d<> ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d<>}
@kindex d<>
@format
@code{d<>} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-not-equals''
@end format

@findex d= ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) double
@cindex @code{d=}
@kindex d=
@format
@code{d=} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) double ``d-equals''
@end format

@findex d> ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d>}
@kindex d>
@format
@code{d>} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-greater-than''
@end format

@findex d>= ( @var{ d1 d2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d>=}
@kindex d>=
@format
@code{d>=} ( @i{d1 d2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex d0< ( @var{ d -- f  } ) double
@cindex @code{d0<}
@kindex d0<
@format
@code{d0<} ( @i{d -- f }) double ``d-zero-less-than''
@end format

@findex d0<= ( @var{ d -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d0<=}
@kindex d0<=
@format
@code{d0<=} ( @i{d -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-zero-less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex d0<> ( @var{ d -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d0<>}
@kindex d0<>
@format
@code{d0<>} ( @i{d -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-zero-not-equals''
@end format

@findex d0= ( @var{ d -- f  } ) double
@cindex @code{d0=}
@kindex d0=
@format
@code{d0=} ( @i{d -- f }) double ``d-zero-equals''
@end format

@findex d0> ( @var{ d -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d0>}
@kindex d0>
@format
@code{d0>} ( @i{d -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-zero-greater-than''
@end format

@findex d0>= ( @var{ d -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{d0>=}
@kindex d0>=
@format
@code{d0>=} ( @i{d -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-zero-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex du< ( @var{ ud1 ud2 -- f  } ) double-ext
@cindex @code{du<}
@kindex du<
@format
@code{du<} ( @i{ud1 ud2 -- f }) double-ext ``d-u-less-than''
@end format

@findex du<= ( @var{ ud1 ud2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{du<=}
@kindex du<=
@format
@code{du<=} ( @i{ud1 ud2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-u-less-or-equal''
@end format

@c du<> and du= exist but are the same as d<> and d=
@c doc-du<>
@c doc-du=
@findex du> ( @var{ ud1 ud2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{du>}
@kindex du>
@format
@code{du>} ( @i{ud1 ud2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-u-greater-than''
@end format

@findex du>= ( @var{ ud1 ud2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{du>=}
@kindex du>=
@format
@code{du>=} ( @i{ud1 ud2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``d-u-greater-or-equal''
@end format



@node Floating Point, , Numeric comparison, Arithmetic
@subsection Floating Point
@cindex floating point arithmetic words

For the rules used by the text interpreter for recognising floating-point
numbers see @ref{Number Conversion}.

Gforth has a separate floating point stack, but the documentation uses the
unified notation.@footnote{It's easy to generate the separate notation from
that by just separating the floating-point numbers out: e.g. @code{( n r1 u
r2 -- r3 )} becomes @code{( n u -- ) ( F: r1 r2 -- r3 )}.}

@cindex floating-point arithmetic, pitfalls
Floating point numbers have a number of unpleasant surprises for the unwary
(e.g., floating point addition is not associative) and even a few for the
wary. You should not use them unless you know what you are doing or you
don't care that the results you get are totally bogus. If you want to learn
about the problems of floating point numbers (and how to avoid them), you
might start with @cite{David Goldberg,
@uref{https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19957-01/806-3568/ncg_goldberg.html,What
Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic}, ACM
Computing Surveys 23(1):5@minus{}48, March 1991}.

Conversion between integers and floating-point:

@findex s>f ( @var{ n -- r  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{s>f}
@kindex s>f
@format
@code{s>f} ( @i{n -- r }) floating-ext ``s-to-f''
@end format

@findex d>f ( @var{ d -- r  } ) floating
@cindex @code{d>f}
@kindex d>f
@format
@code{d>f} ( @i{d -- r }) floating ``d-to-f''
@end format

@findex f>s ( @var{ r -- n  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{f>s}
@kindex f>s
@format
@code{f>s} ( @i{r -- n }) floating-ext ``f-to-s''
@end format

@findex f>d ( @var{ r -- d  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f>d}
@kindex f>d
@format
@code{f>d} ( @i{r -- d }) floating ``f-to-d''
@end format


Arithmetics:

@findex f+ ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f+}
@kindex f+
@format
@code{f+} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-plus''
@end format

@findex f- ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f-}
@kindex f-
@format
@code{f-} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-minus''
@end format

@findex f* ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f*}
@kindex f*
@format
@code{f*} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-star''
@end format

@findex f/ ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f/}
@kindex f/
@format
@code{f/} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-slash''
@end format

@findex fnegate ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fnegate}
@kindex fnegate
@format
@code{fnegate} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating ``f-negate''
@end format

@findex fabs ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fabs}
@kindex fabs
@format
@code{fabs} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-abs''
@end format

@findex fcopysign ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fcopysign}
@kindex fcopysign
@format
@code{fcopysign} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3  }) gforth-1.0 ``fcopysign''
@end format
r3 takes its absolute value from r1 and its sign from r2


@findex fmax ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fmax}
@kindex fmax
@format
@code{fmax} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-max''
@end format

@findex fmin ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fmin}
@kindex fmin
@format
@code{fmin} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating ``f-min''
@end format

@findex floor ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{floor}
@kindex floor
@format
@code{floor} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating ``floor''
@end format
Round towards the next smaller integral value, i.e., round toward negative
infinity.

@findex fround ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fround}
@kindex fround
@format
@code{fround} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating ``f-round''
@end format
Round to the nearest integral value.

@findex ftrunc ( @var{ r1 -- r2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{ftrunc}
@kindex ftrunc
@format
@code{ftrunc} ( @i{r1 -- r2  }) floating-ext ``f-trunc''
@end format
round towards 0


@findex f** ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{f**}
@kindex f**
@format
@code{f**} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating-ext ``f-star-star''
@end format
@i{r3} is @i{r1} raised to the @i{r2}th power.

@findex fsqrt ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fsqrt}
@kindex fsqrt
@format
@code{fsqrt} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-square-root''
@end format

@findex fexp ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fexp}
@kindex fexp
@format
@code{fexp} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-e-x-p''
@end format

@findex fexpm1 ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fexpm1}
@kindex fexpm1
@format
@code{fexpm1} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-e-x-p-m-one''
@end format
@i{r2}=@i{e}**@i{r1}@minus{}1

@findex fln ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fln}
@kindex fln
@format
@code{fln} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-l-n''
@end format

@findex flnp1 ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{flnp1}
@kindex flnp1
@format
@code{flnp1} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-l-n-p-one''
@end format
@i{r2}=ln(@i{r1}+1)

@findex flog ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{flog}
@kindex flog
@format
@code{flog} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-log''
@end format
The decimal logarithm.

@findex falog ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{falog}
@kindex falog
@format
@code{falog} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-log''
@end format
@i{r2}=10**@i{r1}

@findex f2* ( @var{ r1 -- r2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f2*}
@kindex f2*
@format
@code{f2*} ( @i{r1 -- r2  }) gforth-0.2 ``f2*''
@end format
Multiply @i{r1} by 2.0e0


@findex f2/ ( @var{ r1 -- r2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f2/}
@kindex f2/
@format
@code{f2/} ( @i{r1 -- r2  }) gforth-0.2 ``f2/''
@end format
Multiply @i{r1} by 0.5e0


@findex 1/f ( @var{ r1 -- r2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{1/f}
@kindex 1/f
@format
@code{1/f} ( @i{r1 -- r2  }) gforth-0.2 ``1/f''
@end format
Divide 1.0e0 by @i{r1}.



Vector arithmetics:

@findex v* ( @var{ f-addr1 nstride1 f-addr2 nstride2 ucount -- r  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{v*}
@kindex v*
@format
@code{v*} ( @i{f-addr1 nstride1 f-addr2 nstride2 ucount -- r }) gforth-0.5 ``v-star''
@end format
dot-product: r=v1*v2.  The first element of v1 is at f_addr1, the next at
f_addr1+nstride1 and so on (similar for v2). Both vectors have ucount
elements.

@findex faxpy ( @var{ ra f-x nstridex f-y nstridey ucount --  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{faxpy}
@kindex faxpy
@format
@code{faxpy} ( @i{ra f-x nstridex f-y nstridey ucount -- }) gforth-0.5 ``faxpy''
@end format
vy=ra*vx+vy


@cindex angles in trigonometric operations
@cindex trigonometric operations
Angles in floating point operations are given in radians (a full circle has
2 pi radians).

@findex fsin ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fsin}
@kindex fsin
@format
@code{fsin} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-sine''
@end format

@findex fcos ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fcos}
@kindex fcos
@format
@code{fcos} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-cos''
@end format

@findex fsincos ( @var{ r1 -- r2 r3  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fsincos}
@kindex fsincos
@format
@code{fsincos} ( @i{r1 -- r2 r3 }) floating-ext ``f-sine-cos''
@end format
@i{r2}=sin(@i{r1}), @i{r3}=cos(@i{r1})

@findex ftan ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{ftan}
@kindex ftan
@format
@code{ftan} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-tan''
@end format

@findex fasin ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fasin}
@kindex fasin
@format
@code{fasin} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-sine''
@end format

@findex facos ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{facos}
@kindex facos
@format
@code{facos} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-cos''
@end format

@findex fatan ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fatan}
@kindex fatan
@format
@code{fatan} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-tan''
@end format

@findex fatan2 ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r3  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fatan2}
@kindex fatan2
@format
@code{fatan2} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r3 }) floating-ext ``f-a-tan-two''
@end format
@i{r1/r2}=tan(@i{r3}). ANS Forth does not require, but probably intends this
to be the inverse of @code{fsincos}. In gforth it is.

@findex fsinh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fsinh}
@kindex fsinh
@format
@code{fsinh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-cinch''
@end format

@findex fcosh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fcosh}
@kindex fcosh
@format
@code{fcosh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-cosh''
@end format

@findex ftanh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{ftanh}
@kindex ftanh
@format
@code{ftanh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-tan-h''
@end format

@findex fasinh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fasinh}
@kindex fasinh
@format
@code{fasinh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-cinch''
@end format

@findex facosh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{facosh}
@kindex facosh
@format
@code{facosh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-cosh''
@end format

@findex fatanh ( @var{ r1 -- r2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fatanh}
@kindex fatanh
@format
@code{fatanh} ( @i{r1 -- r2 }) floating-ext ``f-a-tan-h''
@end format

@findex pi ( @var{ -- r   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{pi}
@kindex pi
@format
@code{pi} ( @i{-- r  }) gforth-0.2 ``pi''
@end format
@code{Fconstant} -- @i{r} is the value pi; the ratio of a circle's area to
its diameter.



@cindex equality of floats
@cindex floating-point comparisons
One particular problem with floating-point arithmetic is that comparison for
equality often fails when you would expect it to succeed.  For this reason
approximate equality is often preferred (but you still have to know what you
are doing).  Also note that IEEE NaNs may compare differently from what you
might expect.  The comparison words are:

@findex f~rel ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- flag   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{f~rel}
@kindex f~rel
@format
@code{f~rel} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- flag  }) gforth-0.5 ``f~rel''
@end format
Approximate equality with relative error: |r1-r2|<r3*|r1+r2|.


@findex f~abs ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- flag   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{f~abs}
@kindex f~abs
@format
@code{f~abs} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- flag  }) gforth-0.5 ``f~abs''
@end format
Approximate equality with absolute error: |r1-r2|<r3.


@findex f~ ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- flag   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{f~}
@kindex f~
@format
@code{f~} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- flag  }) floating-ext ``f-proximate''
@end format
ANS Forth medley for comparing r1 and r2 for equality: r3>0: @code{f~abs};
r3=0: bitwise comparison; r3<0: @code{fnegate f~rel}.


@findex f= ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f=}
@kindex f=
@format
@code{f=} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-equals''
@end format

@findex f<> ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f<>}
@kindex f<>
@format
@code{f<>} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-not-equals''
@end format


@findex f< ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f<}
@kindex f<
@format
@code{f<} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) floating ``f-less-than''
@end format

@findex f<= ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f<=}
@kindex f<=
@format
@code{f<=} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex f> ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f>}
@kindex f>
@format
@code{f>} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-greater-than''
@end format

@findex f>= ( @var{ r1 r2 -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f>=}
@kindex f>=
@format
@code{f>=} ( @i{r1 r2 -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@findex f0< ( @var{ r -- f  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f0<}
@kindex f0<
@format
@code{f0<} ( @i{r -- f }) floating ``f-zero-less-than''
@end format

@findex f0<= ( @var{ r -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f0<=}
@kindex f0<=
@format
@code{f0<=} ( @i{r -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-zero-less-or-equal''
@end format

@findex f0<> ( @var{ r -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f0<>}
@kindex f0<>
@format
@code{f0<>} ( @i{r -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-zero-not-equals''
@end format

@findex f0= ( @var{ r -- f  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f0=}
@kindex f0=
@format
@code{f0=} ( @i{r -- f }) floating ``f-zero-equals''
@end format

@findex f0> ( @var{ r -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f0>}
@kindex f0>
@format
@code{f0>} ( @i{r -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-zero-greater-than''
@end format

@findex f0>= ( @var{ r -- f  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f0>=}
@kindex f0>=
@format
@code{f0>=} ( @i{r -- f }) gforth-0.2 ``f-zero-greater-or-equal''
@end format


@cindex floating-point constants
Special values in IEEE754 can be derived by for example dividing by zero.
The most common ones are defined as floating point constants for easy usage.

@findex infinity ( @var{ -- r   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{infinity}
@kindex infinity
@format
@code{infinity} ( @i{-- r  }) gforth-1.0 ``infinity''
@end format
floating point infinity


@findex -infinity ( @var{ -- r   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{-infinity}
@kindex -infinity
@format
@code{-infinity} ( @i{-- r  }) gforth-1.0 ``-infinity''
@end format
floating point -infinity


@findex NaN ( @var{ -- r   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{NaN}
@kindex NaN
@format
@code{NaN} ( @i{-- r  }) gforth-1.0 ``NaN''
@end format
floating point Not a Number



@node Stack Manipulation, Memory, Arithmetic, Words
@section Stack Manipulation
@cindex stack manipulation words

@cindex floating-point stack in the standard
Gforth maintains a number of separate stacks:

@cindex data stack
@cindex parameter stack
@itemize @bullet
@item
A data stack (also known as the @dfn{parameter stack}) -- for characters,
cells, addresses, and double cells.

@cindex floating-point stack
@item
A floating point stack -- for holding floating point (FP) numbers.

@cindex return stack
@item
A return stack -- for holding the return addresses of colon definitions and
other (non-FP) data.

@cindex locals stack
@item
A locals stack -- for holding local variables.
@end itemize

@menu
* Data stack::
* Floating point stack::
* Return stack::
* Locals stack::
* Stack pointer manipulation::  
@end menu

@node Data stack, Floating point stack, Stack Manipulation, Stack Manipulation
@subsection Data stack
@cindex data stack manipulation words
@cindex stack manipulations words, data stack


@findex drop ( @var{ w --  } ) core
@cindex @code{drop}
@kindex drop
@format
@code{drop} ( @i{w -- }) core ``drop''
@end format

@findex nip ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w2  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{nip}
@kindex nip
@format
@code{nip} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w2 }) core-ext ``nip''
@end format

@findex dup ( @var{ w -- w w  } ) core
@cindex @code{dup}
@kindex dup
@format
@code{dup} ( @i{w -- w w }) core ``dupe''
@end format

@findex over ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w1 w2 w1  } ) core
@cindex @code{over}
@kindex over
@format
@code{over} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w1 w2 w1 }) core ``over''
@end format

@findex third ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 -- w1 w2 w3 w1  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{third}
@kindex third
@format
@code{third} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 -- w1 w2 w3 w1 }) gforth-1.0 ``third''
@end format

@findex fourth ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w1 w2 w3 w4 w1  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fourth}
@kindex fourth
@format
@code{fourth} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w1 w2 w3 w4 w1 }) gforth-1.0 ``fourth''
@end format

@findex tuck ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w2 w1 w2  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{tuck}
@kindex tuck
@format
@code{tuck} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w2 w1 w2 }) core-ext ``tuck''
@end format

@findex swap ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w2 w1  } ) core
@cindex @code{swap}
@kindex swap
@format
@code{swap} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w2 w1 }) core ``swap''
@end format

@findex pick ( @var{ S:... u -- S:... w  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{pick}
@kindex pick
@format
@code{pick} ( @i{S:... u -- S:... w }) core-ext ``pick''
@end format
Actually the stack effect is @code{ x0 ... xu u -- x0 ... xu x0 }.

@findex rot ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 -- w2 w3 w1  } ) core
@cindex @code{rot}
@kindex rot
@format
@code{rot} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 -- w2 w3 w1 }) core ``rote''
@end format

@findex -rot ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 -- w3 w1 w2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{-rot}
@kindex -rot
@format
@code{-rot} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 -- w3 w1 w2 }) gforth-0.2 ``not-rote''
@end format

@findex ?dup ( @var{ w -- S:... w  } ) core
@cindex @code{?dup}
@kindex ?dup
@format
@code{?dup} ( @i{w -- S:... w }) core ``question-dupe''
@end format
Actually the stack effect is: @code{( w -- 0 | w w )}.  It performs a
@code{dup} if w is nonzero.

@findex roll ( @var{ x0 x1 .. xn n -- x1 .. xn x0   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{roll}
@kindex roll
@format
@code{roll} ( @i{x0 x1 .. xn n -- x1 .. xn x0  }) core-ext ``roll''
@end format

@findex 2drop ( @var{ w1 w2 --  } ) core
@cindex @code{2drop}
@kindex 2drop
@format
@code{2drop} ( @i{w1 w2 -- }) core ``two-drop''
@end format

@findex 2nip ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{2nip}
@kindex 2nip
@format
@code{2nip} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4 }) gforth-0.2 ``two-nip''
@end format

@findex 2dup ( @var{ w1 w2 -- w1 w2 w1 w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2dup}
@kindex 2dup
@format
@code{2dup} ( @i{w1 w2 -- w1 w2 w1 w2 }) core ``two-dupe''
@end format

@findex 2over ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w1 w2 w3 w4 w1 w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2over}
@kindex 2over
@format
@code{2over} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w1 w2 w3 w4 w1 w2 }) core ``two-over''
@end format

@findex 2tuck ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4 w1 w2 w3 w4  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{2tuck}
@kindex 2tuck
@format
@code{2tuck} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4 w1 w2 w3 w4 }) gforth-0.2 ``two-tuck''
@end format

@findex 2swap ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4 w1 w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2swap}
@kindex 2swap
@format
@code{2swap} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 -- w3 w4 w1 w2 }) core ``two-swap''
@end format

@findex 2rot ( @var{ w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 -- w3 w4 w5 w6 w1 w2  } ) double-ext
@cindex @code{2rot}
@kindex 2rot
@format
@code{2rot} ( @i{w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 -- w3 w4 w5 w6 w1 w2 }) double-ext ``two-rote''
@end format



@node Floating point stack, Return stack, Data stack, Stack Manipulation
@subsection Floating point stack
@cindex floating-point stack manipulation words
@cindex stack manipulation words, floating-point stack

@findex fdrop ( @var{ r --  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fdrop}
@kindex fdrop
@format
@code{fdrop} ( @i{r -- }) floating ``f-drop''
@end format

@findex fnip ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{fnip}
@kindex fnip
@format
@code{fnip} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r2 }) gforth-0.2 ``f-nip''
@end format

@findex fdup ( @var{ r -- r r  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fdup}
@kindex fdup
@format
@code{fdup} ( @i{r -- r r }) floating ``f-dupe''
@end format

@findex fover ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r1 r2 r1  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fover}
@kindex fover
@format
@code{fover} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r1 r2 r1 }) floating ``f-over''
@end format

@findex fthird ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- r1 r2 r3 r1  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fthird}
@kindex fthird
@format
@code{fthird} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- r1 r2 r3 r1 }) gforth-1.0 ``fthird''
@end format

@findex ffourth ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 r4 -- r1 r2 r3 r4 r1  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ffourth}
@kindex ffourth
@format
@code{ffourth} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 r4 -- r1 r2 r3 r4 r1 }) gforth-1.0 ``ffourth''
@end format

@findex ftuck ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r2 r1 r2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ftuck}
@kindex ftuck
@format
@code{ftuck} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r2 r1 r2 }) gforth-0.2 ``f-tuck''
@end format

@findex fswap ( @var{ r1 r2 -- r2 r1  } ) floating
@cindex @code{fswap}
@kindex fswap
@format
@code{fswap} ( @i{r1 r2 -- r2 r1 }) floating ``f-swap''
@end format

@findex fpick ( @var{ f:... u -- f:... r  } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{fpick}
@kindex fpick
@format
@code{fpick} ( @i{f:... u -- f:... r }) gforth-0.4 ``fpick''
@end format
Actually the stack effect is @code{ r0 ... ru u -- r0 ... ru r0 }.

@findex frot ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- r2 r3 r1  } ) floating
@cindex @code{frot}
@kindex frot
@format
@code{frot} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- r2 r3 r1 }) floating ``f-rote''
@end format

@findex f-rot ( @var{ r1 r2 r3 -- r3 r1 r2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f-rot}
@kindex f-rot
@format
@code{f-rot} ( @i{r1 r2 r3 -- r3 r1 r2 }) floating ``f-not-rote''
@end format



@node Return stack, Locals stack, Floating point stack, Stack Manipulation
@subsection Return stack
@cindex return stack manipulation words
@cindex stack manipulation words, return stack

@cindex return stack and locals
@cindex locals and return stack
A Forth system is allowed to keep local variables on the return stack. This
is reasonable, as local variables usually eliminate the need to use the
return stack explicitly. So, if you want to produce a standard compliant
program and you are using local variables in a word, forget about return
stack manipulations in that word (refer to the standard document for the
exact rules).

@findex >r ( @var{ w -- R:w  } ) core
@cindex @code{>r}
@kindex >r
@format
@code{>r} ( @i{w -- R:w }) core ``to-r''
@end format

@findex r> ( @var{ R:w -- w  } ) core
@cindex @code{r>}
@kindex r>
@format
@code{r>} ( @i{R:w -- w }) core ``r-from''
@end format

@findex r@@ ( @var{ -- w ; R: w -- w   } ) core
@cindex @code{r@@}
@kindex r@@
@format
@code{r@@} ( @i{-- w ; R: w -- w  }) core ``r-fetch''
@end format

@findex rdrop ( @var{ R:w --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{rdrop}
@kindex rdrop
@format
@code{rdrop} ( @i{R:w -- }) gforth-0.2 ``rdrop''
@end format

@findex 2>r ( @var{ w1 w2 -- R:w1 R:w2  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{2>r}
@kindex 2>r
@format
@code{2>r} ( @i{w1 w2 -- R:w1 R:w2 }) core-ext ``two-to-r''
@end format

@findex 2r> ( @var{ R:w1 R:w2 -- w1 w2  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{2r>}
@kindex 2r>
@format
@code{2r>} ( @i{R:w1 R:w2 -- w1 w2 }) core-ext ``two-r-from''
@end format

@findex 2r@@ ( @var{ R:w1 R:w2 -- R:w1 R:w2 w1 w2  } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{2r@@}
@kindex 2r@@
@format
@code{2r@@} ( @i{R:w1 R:w2 -- R:w1 R:w2 w1 w2 }) core-ext ``two-r-fetch''
@end format

@findex 2rdrop ( @var{ R:w1 R:w2 --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{2rdrop}
@kindex 2rdrop
@format
@code{2rdrop} ( @i{R:w1 R:w2 -- }) gforth-0.2 ``two-r-drop''
@end format

@findex n>r ( @var{ x1 .. xn n -- r:xn..x1 r:n   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{n>r}
@kindex n>r
@format
@code{n>r} ( @i{x1 .. xn n -- r:xn..x1 r:n  }) tools-ext ``n-to-r''
@end format

@findex nr> ( @var{ r:xn..x1 r:n -- x1 .. xn n   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{nr>}
@kindex nr>
@format
@code{nr>} ( @i{r:xn..x1 r:n -- x1 .. xn n  }) tools-ext ``n-r-from''
@end format


@node Locals stack, Stack pointer manipulation, Return stack, Stack Manipulation
@subsection Locals stack

Gforth uses an extra locals stack.  It is described, along with the reasons
for its existence, in @ref{Locals implementation}.

@node Stack pointer manipulation, , Locals stack, Stack Manipulation
@subsection Stack pointer manipulation
@cindex stack pointer manipulation words

@c removed s0 r0 l0 -- they are obsolete aliases for sp0 rp0 lp0
@findex sp0 ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{sp0}
@kindex sp0
@format
@code{sp0} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``sp0''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- initial value of the data stack pointer.


@findex sp@@ ( @var{ S:... -- a-addr  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{sp@@}
@kindex sp@@
@format
@code{sp@@} ( @i{S:... -- a-addr }) gforth-0.2 ``sp-fetch''
@end format

@findex sp! ( @var{ a-addr -- S:...  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{sp!}
@kindex sp!
@format
@code{sp!} ( @i{a-addr -- S:... }) gforth-0.2 ``sp-store''
@end format

@findex fp0 ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{fp0}
@kindex fp0
@format
@code{fp0} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``fp0''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- initial value of the floating-point stack pointer.


@findex fp@@ ( @var{ f:... -- f-addr  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{fp@@}
@kindex fp@@
@format
@code{fp@@} ( @i{f:... -- f-addr }) gforth-0.2 ``fp-fetch''
@end format

@findex fp! ( @var{ f-addr -- f:...  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{fp!}
@kindex fp!
@format
@code{fp!} ( @i{f-addr -- f:... }) gforth-0.2 ``fp-store''
@end format

@findex rp0 ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{rp0}
@kindex rp0
@format
@code{rp0} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``rp0''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- initial value of the return stack pointer.


@findex rp@@ ( @var{ -- a-addr  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{rp@@}
@kindex rp@@
@format
@code{rp@@} ( @i{-- a-addr }) gforth-0.2 ``rp-fetch''
@end format

@findex rp! ( @var{ a-addr --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{rp!}
@kindex rp!
@format
@code{rp!} ( @i{a-addr -- }) gforth-0.2 ``rp-store''
@end format

@findex lp0 ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{lp0}
@kindex lp0
@format
@code{lp0} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``lp0''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- initial value of the locals stack pointer.


@findex lp@@ ( @var{ -- c-addr  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{lp@@}
@kindex lp@@
@format
@code{lp@@} ( @i{-- c-addr }) gforth-0.2 ``lp-fetch''
@end format
@i{C_addr} is the current value of the locals stack pointer.

@findex lp! ( @var{ c-addr --  } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{lp!}
@kindex lp!
@format
@code{lp!} ( @i{c-addr -- }) gforth-internal ``lp-store''
@end format



@node Memory, Strings and Characters, Stack Manipulation, Words
@section Memory
@cindex memory words

@menu
* Memory model::
* Dictionary allocation::
* Heap Allocation::
* Memory Access::
* Special Memory Accesses::
* Address arithmetic::
* Memory Blocks::            
@end menu

In addition to the standard Forth memory allocation words, there is also a
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/garbage-collection.zip,
garbage collector}.

@node Memory model, Dictionary allocation, Memory, Memory
@subsection Memory model

@c The Standard Forth description is a mess (e.g., is the heap part of
@c the dictionary?), so let's not stick to closely with it.

Standard Forth considers a Forth system as consisting of several address
spaces, of which only @dfn{data space} is managed and accessible with the
memory words.  Memory not necessarily in data space includes the stacks, the
code (called code space) and the headers (called name space). In Gforth
everything is in data space, but the code for the primitives is usually
read-only.

Data space is divided into a number of areas: The (data space portion of
the) dictionary@footnote{Sometimes, the term @dfn{dictionary} is used to
refer to the search data structure embodied in word lists and headers,
because it is used for looking up names, just as you would in a conventional
dictionary.}, the heap, and a number of system-allocated buffers.

Gforth provides one big address space, and address arithmetic can be
performed between any addresses. However, in the dictionary headers or code
are interleaved with data, so almost the only contiguous data space regions
there are those described by Standard Forth as contiguous; but you can be
sure that the dictionary is allocated towards increasing addresses even
between contiguous regions.  The memory order of allocations in the heap is
platform-dependent (and possibly different from one run to the next).


@node Dictionary allocation, Heap Allocation, Memory model, Memory
@subsection Dictionary allocation
@cindex reserving data space
@cindex data space - reserving some

Dictionary allocation is a stack-oriented allocation scheme, i.e., if you
want to deallocate X, you also deallocate everything allocated after X.

@cindex contiguous regions in dictionary allocation
The allocations using the words below are contiguous and grow the region
towards increasing addresses.  Other words that allocate dictionary memory
of any kind (i.e., defining words including @code{:noname}) end the
contiguous region and start a new one.

In Standard Forth only @code{create}d words are guaranteed to produce an
address that is the start of the following contiguous region.  In
particular, the cell allocated by @code{variable} is not guaranteed to be
contiguous with following @code{allot}ed memory.

You can deallocate memory by using @code{allot} with a negative argument
(with some restrictions, see @code{allot}). For larger deallocations use
@code{marker}.


@findex here ( @var{ -- addr   } ) core
@cindex @code{here}
@kindex here
@format
@code{here} ( @i{-- addr  }) core ``here''
@end format
Return the address of the next free location in data space.


@findex unused ( @var{ -- u   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{unused}
@kindex unused
@format
@code{unused} ( @i{-- u  }) core-ext ``unused''
@end format
Return the amount of free space remaining (in address units) in the region
addressed by @code{here}.


@findex allot ( @var{ n --   } ) core
@cindex @code{allot}
@kindex allot
@format
@code{allot} ( @i{n --  }) core ``allot''
@end format
Reserve @i{n} address units of data space without initialization. @i{n} is a
signed number, passing a negative @i{n} releases memory.  In ANS Forth you
can only deallocate memory from the current contiguous region in this way.
In Gforth you can deallocate anything in this way but named words.  The
system does not check this restriction.


@findex ->here ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{->here}
@kindex ->here
@format
@code{->here} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``to-here''
@end format
Change the value of @code{here} to @i{addr}.


@findex c, ( @var{ c --   } ) core
@cindex @code{c,}
@kindex c,
@format
@code{c,} ( @i{c --  }) core ``c-comma''
@end format
Reserve data space for one char and store @i{c} in the space.


@findex f, ( @var{ f --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f,}
@kindex f,
@format
@code{f,} ( @i{f --  }) gforth-0.2 ``f,''
@end format
Reserve data space for one floating-point number and store @i{f} in the
space.


@findex , ( @var{ w --   } ) core
@cindex @code{,}
@kindex ,
@format
@code{,} ( @i{w --  }) core ``comma''
@end format
Reserve data space for one cell and store @i{w} in the space.


@findex 2, ( @var{ w1 w2 --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{2,}
@kindex 2,
@format
@code{2,} ( @i{w1 w2 --  }) gforth-0.2 ``2,''
@end format
Reserve data space for two cells and store the double @i{w1 w2} there,
@i{w2} first (lower address).


@findex w, ( @var{ w --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{w,}
@kindex w,
@format
@code{w,} ( @i{w --  }) gforth-1.0 ``w-comma''
@end format

@findex l, ( @var{ l --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{l,}
@kindex l,
@format
@code{l,} ( @i{l --  }) gforth-1.0 ``l-comma''
@end format

@findex x, ( @var{ x --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{x,}
@kindex x,
@format
@code{x,} ( @i{x --  }) gforth-1.0 ``x-comma''
@end format

@findex xd, ( @var{ xd --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xd,}
@kindex xd,
@format
@code{xd,} ( @i{xd --  }) gforth-1.0 ``x-d-comma''
@end format

@findex A, ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{A,}
@kindex A,
@format
@code{A,} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-0.2 ``A,''
@end format
Reserve data space for one cell, and store @i{addr} there.  For our
cross-compiler this provides the type information necessary for a
relocatable image; normally, though, this is equivalent to @code{,}.


@findex mem, ( @var{ addr u --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{mem,}
@kindex mem,
@format
@code{mem,} ( @i{addr u --  }) gforth-0.6 ``mem,''
@end format

doc-save-mem-dict

Memory accesses have to be aligned (@pxref{Address arithmetic}). So of
course you should allocate memory in an aligned way, too. I.e., before
allocating allocating a cell, @code{here} must be cell-aligned, etc.  The
words below align @code{here} if it is not already.  Basically it is only
already aligned for a type, if the last allocation was a multiple of the
size of this type and if @code{here} was aligned for this type before.

After freshly @code{create}ing a word, @code{here} is @code{align}ed in
Standard Forth (@code{maxalign}ed in Gforth).

@findex align ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{align}
@kindex align
@format
@code{align} ( @i{--  }) core ``align''
@end format
If the data-space pointer is not aligned, reserve enough space to align it.


@findex falign ( @var{ --   } ) floating
@cindex @code{falign}
@kindex falign
@format
@code{falign} ( @i{--  }) floating ``f-align''
@end format
If the data-space pointer is not float-aligned, reserve enough space to
align it.


@findex sfalign ( @var{ --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sfalign}
@kindex sfalign
@format
@code{sfalign} ( @i{--  }) floating-ext ``s-f-align''
@end format
If the data-space pointer is not single-float-aligned, reserve enough space
to align it.


@findex dfalign ( @var{ --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{dfalign}
@kindex dfalign
@format
@code{dfalign} ( @i{--  }) floating-ext ``d-f-align''
@end format
If the data-space pointer is not double-float-aligned, reserve enough space
to align it.


@findex maxalign ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{maxalign}
@kindex maxalign
@format
@code{maxalign} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``maxalign''
@end format
Align data-space pointer for all alignment requirements.


@findex cfalign ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{cfalign}
@kindex cfalign
@format
@code{cfalign} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``cfalign''
@end format
Align data-space pointer for code field requirements (i.e., such that the
corresponding body is maxaligned).






@node Heap Allocation, Memory Access, Dictionary allocation, Memory
@subsection Heap allocation
@cindex heap allocation
@cindex dynamic allocation of memory
@cindex memory-allocation word set

@cindex contiguous regions and heap allocation
Heap allocation supports deallocation of allocated memory in any
order. Dictionary allocation is not affected by it (i.e., it does not end a
contiguous region). In Gforth, these words are implemented using the
standard C library calls malloc(), free() and realloc().

The memory region produced by one invocation of @code{allocate} or
@code{resize} is internally contiguous.  There is no contiguity between such
a region and any other region (including others allocated from the heap).

@findex allocate ( @var{ u -- a_addr wior   } ) memory
@cindex @code{allocate}
@kindex allocate
@format
@code{allocate} ( @i{u -- a_addr wior  }) memory ``allocate''
@end format
Allocate @i{u} address units of contiguous data space. The initial contents
of the data space is undefined. If the allocation is successful, @i{a-addr}
is the start address of the allocated region and @i{wior} is 0. If the
allocation fails, @i{a-addr} is undefined and @i{wior} is a non-zero I/O
result code.


@findex free ( @var{ a_addr -- wior   } ) memory
@cindex @code{free}
@kindex free
@format
@code{free} ( @i{a_addr -- wior  }) memory ``free''
@end format
Return the region of data space starting at @i{a-addr} to the system.  The
region must originally have been obtained using @code{allocate} or
@code{resize}. If the operational is successful, @i{wior} is 0.  If the
operation fails, @i{wior} is a non-zero I/O result code.


@findex resize ( @var{ a_addr1 u -- a_addr2 wior   } ) memory
@cindex @code{resize}
@kindex resize
@format
@code{resize} ( @i{a_addr1 u -- a_addr2 wior  }) memory ``resize''
@end format
Change the size of the allocated area at @i{a-addr1} to @i{u} address units,
possibly moving the contents to a different area. @i{a-addr2} is the address
of the resulting area.  If the operation is successful, @i{wior} is 0.  If
the operation fails, @i{wior} is a non-zero I/O result code. If @i{a-addr1}
is 0, Gforth's (but not the Standard) @code{resize} @code{allocate}s @i{u}
address units.



The following words are useful for dealing with memory blocks:

@findex save-mem ( @var{ addr1 u -- addr2 u   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{save-mem}
@kindex save-mem
@format
@code{save-mem} ( @i{addr1 u -- addr2 u  }) gforth-0.2 ``save-mem''
@end format
Copy a memory block into a newly allocated region in the heap.


@findex free-mem-var ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{free-mem-var}
@kindex free-mem-var
@format
@code{free-mem-var} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-experimental ``free-mem-var''
@end format
Addr is the address of a 2variable containing address and size of a memory
range; frees memory and clears the 2variable.


@findex extend-mem ( @var{ addr1 u1 u -- addr addr2 u2   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{extend-mem}
@kindex extend-mem
@format
@code{extend-mem} ( @i{addr1 u1 u -- addr addr2 u2  }) gforth-experimental ``extend-mem''
@end format
Extend memory block addr1 u1 allocated from the heap by u aus.  The
(possibly reallocated) piece is addr2 u2, the extension is at addr.




The $tring words can also be used for dealing with memory blocks,
@xref{$tring words}.

For growable memory buffers you can use $trings, or the following words.
Because the allocated memory of a buffer managed with @code{adjust-buffer}
does not shrink, there is no heap-management overhead when adjusting the
buffer for a size smaller than the largest one seen yet.

@findex buffer% ( @var{ u1 u2 --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{buffer%}
@kindex buffer%
@format
@code{buffer%} ( @i{u1 u2 --  }) gforth-experimental ``buffer%''
@end format
@i{u1} is the alignment and @i{u2} is the size of a buffer descriptor.


@findex init-buffer ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{init-buffer}
@kindex init-buffer
@format
@code{init-buffer} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-experimental ``init-buffer''
@end format

@findex adjust-buffer ( @var{ u addr --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{adjust-buffer}
@kindex adjust-buffer
@format
@code{adjust-buffer} ( @i{u addr --  }) gforth-experimental ``adjust-buffer''
@end format
Adjust buffer% at addr to length u.  This may grow the allocated area, but
never shrinks it.



You can get the current address and length of such a buffer with @code{2@@}.

Typical usage:

@example
create mybuf  buffer% %size allot  mybuf init-buffer
s" frobnicate" mybuf adjust-buffer  mybuf 2@@ move
mybuf 2@@ type
s" foo"        mybuf adjust-buffer  mybuf 2@@ move
mybuf 2@@ type
@end example


@node Memory Access, Special Memory Accesses, Heap Allocation, Memory
@subsection Memory Access
@cindex memory access words

@findex @@ ( @var{ a-addr -- w  } ) core
@cindex @code{@@}
@kindex @@
@format
@code{@@} ( @i{a-addr -- w }) core ``fetch''
@end format
@i{w} is the cell stored at @i{a_addr}.

@findex ! ( @var{ w a-addr --  } ) core
@cindex @code{!}
@kindex !
@format
@code{!} ( @i{w a-addr -- }) core ``store''
@end format
Store @i{w} into the cell at @i{a-addr}.

@findex +! ( @var{ n a-addr --  } ) core
@cindex @code{+!}
@kindex +!
@format
@code{+!} ( @i{n a-addr -- }) core ``plus-store''
@end format
Add @i{n} to the cell at @i{a-addr}.

@findex c@@ ( @var{ c-addr -- c  } ) core
@cindex @code{c@@}
@kindex c@@
@format
@code{c@@} ( @i{c-addr -- c }) core ``c-fetch''
@end format
@i{c} is the char stored at @i{c_addr}.

@findex c! ( @var{ c c-addr --  } ) core
@cindex @code{c!}
@kindex c!
@format
@code{c!} ( @i{c c-addr -- }) core ``c-store''
@end format
Store @i{c} into the char at @i{c-addr}.

@findex 2@@ ( @var{ a-addr -- w1 w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{2@@}
@kindex 2@@
@format
@code{2@@} ( @i{a-addr -- w1 w2 }) core ``two-fetch''
@end format
@i{w2} is the content of the cell stored at @i{a-addr}, @i{w1} is the
content of the next cell.

@findex 2! ( @var{ w1 w2 a-addr --  } ) core
@cindex @code{2!}
@kindex 2!
@format
@code{2!} ( @i{w1 w2 a-addr -- }) core ``two-store''
@end format
Store @i{w2} into the cell at @i{c-addr} and @i{w1} into the next cell.

@findex f@@ ( @var{ f-addr -- r  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f@@}
@kindex f@@
@format
@code{f@@} ( @i{f-addr -- r }) floating ``f-fetch''
@end format
@i{r} is the float at address @i{f-addr}.

@findex f! ( @var{ r f-addr --  } ) floating
@cindex @code{f!}
@kindex f!
@format
@code{f!} ( @i{r f-addr -- }) floating ``f-store''
@end format
Store @i{r} into the float at address @i{f-addr}.

@findex sf@@ ( @var{ sf-addr -- r  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sf@@}
@kindex sf@@
@format
@code{sf@@} ( @i{sf-addr -- r }) floating-ext ``s-f-fetch''
@end format
Fetch the single-precision IEEE floating-point value @i{r} from the address
@i{sf-addr}.

@findex sf! ( @var{ r sf-addr --  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sf!}
@kindex sf!
@format
@code{sf!} ( @i{r sf-addr -- }) floating-ext ``s-f-store''
@end format
Store @i{r} as single-precision IEEE floating-point value to the address
@i{sf-addr}.

@findex df@@ ( @var{ df-addr -- r  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{df@@}
@kindex df@@
@format
@code{df@@} ( @i{df-addr -- r }) floating-ext ``d-f-fetch''
@end format
Fetch the double-precision IEEE floating-point value @i{r} from the address
@i{df-addr}.

@findex df! ( @var{ r df-addr --  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{df!}
@kindex df!
@format
@code{df!} ( @i{r df-addr -- }) floating-ext ``d-f-store''
@end format
Store @i{r} as double-precision IEEE floating-point value to the address
@i{df-addr}.


@node Special Memory Accesses, Address arithmetic, Memory Access, Memory
@subsection Special Memory Accesses
@cindex byte order
@cindex big-endian
@cindex little-endian
@cindex sign extension
@cindex unaligned memory access

This section is about memory accesses useful for communicating with other
software or other computers.  This means that the accesses are of a certain
bit width (independent of Gforth's cell width), are possibly not naturally
aligned and typically have a certain byte order that may be different from
the native byte order of the system that Gforth runs on.

We use the following prefixes:

@table @code
@item c
8 bits (character)
@item w
16 bits
@item l
32 bits
@item x
64 bits represented as one cell
@item xd
64 bits represented as two cells
@end table

The @code{x}-prefix words do not work properly on 32-bit systems, so for
code that is intended to be portable to 32-bit systems you should use
@code{xd}-prefix words.  Note that @code{xd}-prefix words work on 64-bit
systems: there the upper cell is just 0 (for unsigned values)  or a sign
extension of the lower cell.

The memory-access words below all work with arbitrarily (un)aligned
addresses (unlike @code{@@}, @code{!}, @code{f@@}, @code{f!}, which require
alignment on some hardware).

@findex w@@ ( @var{ c-addr -- u  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{w@@}
@kindex w@@
@format
@code{w@@} ( @i{c-addr -- u }) gforth-0.5 ``w-fetch''
@end format
@i{u} is the zero-extended 16-bit value stored at @i{c_addr}.

@findex w! ( @var{ w c-addr --  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{w!}
@kindex w!
@format
@code{w!} ( @i{w c-addr -- }) gforth-0.7 ``w-store''
@end format
Store the bottom 16 bits of @i{w} at @i{c_addr}.

@findex l@@ ( @var{ c-addr -- u  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{l@@}
@kindex l@@
@format
@code{l@@} ( @i{c-addr -- u }) gforth-0.7 ``l-fetch''
@end format
@i{u} is the zero-extended 32-bit value stored at @i{c_addr}.

@findex l! ( @var{ w c-addr --  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{l!}
@kindex l!
@format
@code{l!} ( @i{w c-addr -- }) gforth-0.7 ``l-store''
@end format
Store the bottom 32 bits of @i{w} at @i{c_addr}.

@findex x@@ ( @var{ c-addr -- u  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{x@@}
@kindex x@@
@format
@code{x@@} ( @i{c-addr -- u }) gforth-1.0 ``x-fetch''
@end format
@i{u} is the zero-extended 64-bit value stored at @i{c_addr}.

@findex x! ( @var{ w c-addr --  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{x!}
@kindex x!
@format
@code{x!} ( @i{w c-addr -- }) gforth-1.0 ``x-store''
@end format
Store the bottom 64 bits of @i{w} at @i{c_addr}.

@findex xd@@ ( @var{ c-addr -- ud  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xd@@}
@kindex xd@@
@format
@code{xd@@} ( @i{c-addr -- ud }) gforth-1.0 ``x-d-fetch''
@end format
@i{ud} is the zero-extended 64-bit value stored at @i{c_addr}.

@findex xd! ( @var{ ud c-addr --  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xd!}
@kindex xd!
@format
@code{xd!} ( @i{ud c-addr -- }) gforth-1.0 ``x-d-store''
@end format
Store the bottom 64 bits of @i{ud} at @i{c_addr}.


For accesses with a specific byte order, you have to perform byte-order
adjustment immediately after a fetch (before the sign-extension), or
immediately before the store.  The results of these byte-order adjustment
words are always zero-extended.

@findex wbe ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wbe}
@kindex wbe
@format
@code{wbe} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``wbe''
@end format
Convert 16-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to big-endian or from
big-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex wle ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wle}
@kindex wle
@format
@code{wle} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``wle''
@end format
Convert 16-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to little-endian or
from little-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex lbe ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lbe}
@kindex lbe
@format
@code{lbe} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``lbe''
@end format
Convert 32-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to big-endian or from
big-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex lle ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lle}
@kindex lle
@format
@code{lle} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``lle''
@end format
Convert 32-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to little-endian or
from little-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex xbe ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xbe}
@kindex xbe
@format
@code{xbe} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``xbe''
@end format
Convert 64-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to big-endian or from
big-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex xle ( @var{ u1 -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xle}
@kindex xle
@format
@code{xle} ( @i{u1 -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``xle''
@end format
Convert 64-bit value in @i{u1} from native byte order to little-endian or
from little-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex xdbe ( @var{ ud1 -- ud2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xdbe}
@kindex xdbe
@format
@code{xdbe} ( @i{ud1 -- ud2  }) gforth-1.0 ``xdbe''
@end format
Convert 64-bit value in @i{ud1} from native byte order to big-endian or from
big-endian to native byte order (the same operation)


@findex xdle ( @var{ ud1 -- ud2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xdle}
@kindex xdle
@format
@code{xdle} ( @i{ud1 -- ud2  }) gforth-1.0 ``xdle''
@end format
Convert 64-bit value in @i{ud1} from native byte order to little-endian or
from little-endian to native byte order (the same operation)



For signed fetches with a specific byte order, you have to perform a
sign-extension word after an unsigned fetch and a byte-order correction:

@findex c>s ( @var{ x -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c>s}
@kindex c>s
@format
@code{c>s} ( @i{x -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``c-to-s''
@end format
Sign-extend the 8-bit value in @i{x} to cell @i{n}.

@findex w>s ( @var{ x -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{w>s}
@kindex w>s
@format
@code{w>s} ( @i{x -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``w-to-s''
@end format
Sign-extend the 16-bit value in @i{x} to cell @i{n}.

@findex l>s ( @var{ x -- n  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{l>s}
@kindex l>s
@format
@code{l>s} ( @i{x -- n }) gforth-1.0 ``l-to-s''
@end format
Sign-extend the 32-bit value in @i{x} to cell @i{n}.

@findex x>s ( @var{ x -- n   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{x>s}
@kindex x>s
@format
@code{x>s} ( @i{x -- n  }) gforth-1.0 ``x>s''
@end format
Sign-extend the 64-bit value in @i{x} to cell @i{n}.


@findex xd>s ( @var{ xd -- d   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xd>s}
@kindex xd>s
@format
@code{xd>s} ( @i{xd -- d  }) gforth-1.0 ``xd>s''
@end format
Sign-extend the 64-bit value in @var{xd} to double-ceel @var{d}.



Overall, this leads to sequences like

@example
w@@ wbe w>s   \ 16-bit unaligned signed big-endian fetch
>r lle r> l! \ 32-bit unaligned little-endian store
@end example

@node Address arithmetic, Memory Blocks, Special Memory Accesses, Memory
@subsection Address arithmetic
@cindex address arithmetic words

Address arithmetic is the foundation on which you can build data structures
like arrays, records (@pxref{Structures}) and objects
(@pxref{Object-oriented Forth}).

@cindex address unit
@cindex au (address unit)
Standard Forth does not specify the sizes of the data types. Instead, it
offers a number of words for computing sizes and doing address
arithmetic. Address arithmetic is performed in terms of address units (aus);
on most systems the address unit is one byte. Note that a character may have
more than one au, so @code{chars} is no noop (on platforms where it is a
noop, it compiles to nothing).

The basic address arithmetic words are @code{+} and @code{-}.  E.g., if you
have the address of a cell, perform @code{1 cells +}, and you will have the
address of the next cell.

@cindex alignment of addresses for types
Standard Forth also defines words for aligning addresses for specific
types. Many computers require that accesses to specific data types must only
occur at specific addresses; e.g., that cells may only be accessed at
addresses divisible by 4. Even if a machine allows unaligned accesses, it
can usually perform aligned accesses faster. 

For the performance-conscious: alignment operations are usually only
necessary during the definition of a data structure, not during the (more
frequent) accesses to it.

Standard Forth defines no words for character-aligning addresses; in
Forth-2012 all addresses are character-aligned.

@cindex @code{CREATE} and alignment
Standard Forth guarantees that addresses returned by @code{CREATE}d words
are cell-aligned; in addition, Gforth guarantees that these addresses are
aligned for all purposes.

Note that the Standard Forth word @code{char} has nothing to do with address
arithmetic.


@findex chars ( @var{ n1 -- n2   } ) core
@cindex @code{chars}
@kindex chars
@format
@code{chars} ( @i{n1 -- n2  }) core ``chars''
@end format
@i{n2} is the number of address units of @i{n1} chars.""


@findex char+ ( @var{ c-addr1 -- c-addr2  } ) core
@cindex @code{char+}
@kindex char+
@format
@code{char+} ( @i{c-addr1 -- c-addr2 }) core ``char-plus''
@end format
@code{1 chars +}.

@findex char- ( @var{ c-addr1 -- c-addr2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{char-}
@kindex char-
@format
@code{char-} ( @i{c-addr1 -- c-addr2  }) gforth-0.7 ``char-minus''
@end format

@findex cells ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) core
@cindex @code{cells}
@kindex cells
@format
@code{cells} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) core ``cells''
@end format
 @i{n2} is the number of address units of @i{n1} cells.

@findex cell+ ( @var{ a-addr1 -- a-addr2  } ) core
@cindex @code{cell+}
@kindex cell+
@format
@code{cell+} ( @i{a-addr1 -- a-addr2 }) core ``cell-plus''
@end format
@code{1 cells +}

@findex cell- ( @var{ a-addr1 -- a-addr2  } ) core
@cindex @code{cell-}
@kindex cell-
@format
@code{cell-} ( @i{a-addr1 -- a-addr2 }) core ``cell-minus''
@end format
@code{1 cells -}

@findex cell/ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{cell/}
@kindex cell/
@format
@code{cell/} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) gforth-1.0 ``cell-divide''
@end format
@i{n2} is the number of cells that fit into @i{n1}

@findex cell ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{cell}
@kindex cell
@format
@code{cell} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-0.2 ``cell''
@end format
@code{Constant} -- @code{1 cells}


@findex aligned ( @var{ c-addr -- a-addr  } ) core
@cindex @code{aligned}
@kindex aligned
@format
@code{aligned} ( @i{c-addr -- a-addr }) core ``aligned''
@end format
 @i{a-addr} is the first aligned address greater than or equal to @i{c-addr}.

@findex floats ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{floats}
@kindex floats
@format
@code{floats} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) floating ``floats''
@end format
@i{n2} is the number of address units of @i{n1} floats.

@findex float+ ( @var{ f-addr1 -- f-addr2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{float+}
@kindex float+
@format
@code{float+} ( @i{f-addr1 -- f-addr2 }) floating ``float-plus''
@end format
@code{1 floats +}.

@findex float ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-0.3
@cindex @code{float}
@kindex float
@format
@code{float} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-0.3 ``float''
@end format
@code{Constant} -- the number of address units corresponding to a
floating-point number.


@findex float/ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{float/}
@kindex float/
@format
@code{float/} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) gforth-1.0 ``float-divide''
@end format

@findex faligned ( @var{ c-addr -- f-addr  } ) floating
@cindex @code{faligned}
@kindex faligned
@format
@code{faligned} ( @i{c-addr -- f-addr }) floating ``f-aligned''
@end format
 @i{f-addr} is the first float-aligned address greater than or equal to
@i{c-addr}.

@findex sfloats ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sfloats}
@kindex sfloats
@format
@code{sfloats} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) floating-ext ``s-floats''
@end format
@i{n2} is the number of address units of @i{n1} single-precision IEEE
floating-point numbers.

@findex sfloat+ ( @var{ sf-addr1 -- sf-addr2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sfloat+}
@kindex sfloat+
@format
@code{sfloat+} ( @i{sf-addr1 -- sf-addr2  }) floating-ext ``s-float-plus''
@end format
@code{1 sfloats +}.


@findex sfloat/ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{sfloat/}
@kindex sfloat/
@format
@code{sfloat/} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) gforth-1.0 ``dfloat-divide''
@end format

@findex sfaligned ( @var{ c-addr -- sf-addr  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sfaligned}
@kindex sfaligned
@format
@code{sfaligned} ( @i{c-addr -- sf-addr }) floating-ext ``s-f-aligned''
@end format
@i{sf-addr} is the first single-float-aligned address greater than or equal
to @i{c-addr}.

@findex dfloats ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{dfloats}
@kindex dfloats
@format
@code{dfloats} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) floating-ext ``d-floats''
@end format
@i{n2} is the number of address units of @i{n1} double-precision IEEE
floating-point numbers.

@findex dfloat+ ( @var{ df-addr1 -- df-addr2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{dfloat+}
@kindex dfloat+
@format
@code{dfloat+} ( @i{df-addr1 -- df-addr2  }) floating-ext ``d-float-plus''
@end format
@code{1 dfloats +}.


@findex dfloat/ ( @var{ n1 -- n2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dfloat/}
@kindex dfloat/
@format
@code{dfloat/} ( @i{n1 -- n2 }) gforth-1.0 ``sfloat-divide''
@end format

@findex dfaligned ( @var{ c-addr -- df-addr  } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{dfaligned}
@kindex dfaligned
@format
@code{dfaligned} ( @i{c-addr -- df-addr }) floating-ext ``d-f-aligned''
@end format
@i{df-addr} is the first double-float-aligned address greater than or equal
to @i{c-addr}.

@findex maxaligned ( @var{ addr1 -- addr2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{maxaligned}
@kindex maxaligned
@format
@code{maxaligned} ( @i{addr1 -- addr2  }) gforth-0.2 ``maxaligned''
@end format
@i{addr2} is the first address after @i{addr1} that satisfies all alignment
restrictions.  maxaligned"


@findex cfaligned ( @var{ addr1 -- addr2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{cfaligned}
@kindex cfaligned
@format
@code{cfaligned} ( @i{addr1 -- addr2  }) gforth-0.2 ``cfaligned''
@end format
@i{addr2} is the first address after @i{addr1} that is aligned for a code
field (i.e., such that the corresponding body is maxaligned).


@findex *aligned ( @var{ addr1 n -- addr2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*aligned}
@kindex *aligned
@format
@code{*aligned} ( @i{addr1 n -- addr2  }) gforth-1.0 ``*aligned''
@end format
@var{addr2} is the aligned version of @var{addr1} with respect to the
alignment @var{n}.


@findex *align ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{*align}
@kindex *align
@format
@code{*align} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-1.0 ``*align''
@end format
Align @code{here} with respect to the alignment @var{n}.


@findex waligned ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{waligned}
@kindex waligned
@format
@code{waligned} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) gforth-1.0 ``waligned''
@end format
@i{Addr'} is the next even address >= @i{addr}.


@findex walign ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{walign}
@kindex walign
@format
@code{walign} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``walign''
@end format
Align @code{here} to even.


@findex laligned ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{laligned}
@kindex laligned
@format
@code{laligned} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) gforth-1.0 ``laligned''
@end format
@i{Addr'} is the next address >= @i{addr} divisible by 4.


@findex lalign ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lalign}
@kindex lalign
@format
@code{lalign} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``lalign''
@end format
Align @code{here} to be divisible by 4.


@findex xaligned ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xaligned}
@kindex xaligned
@format
@code{xaligned} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) gforth-1.0 ``xaligned''
@end format
@i{Addr'} is the next address >= @i{addr} divisible by 8.


@findex xalign ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xalign}
@kindex xalign
@format
@code{xalign} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``xalign''
@end format
Align @code{here} to be divisible by 8.



The environmental query @code{address-unit-bits} (@pxref{Environmental
Queries}) and the following words may be useful to those who want to write
software portable to non-byte-addressed machines.

@findex /w ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{/w}
@kindex /w
@format
@code{/w} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-0.7 ``slash-w''
@end format
address units for a 16-bit value


@findex /l ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{/l}
@kindex /l
@format
@code{/l} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-0.7 ``slash-l''
@end format
address units for a 32-bit value


@findex /x ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{/x}
@kindex /x
@format
@code{/x} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``slash-x''
@end format
address units for a 64-bit value



@node Memory Blocks, , Address arithmetic, Memory
@subsection Memory Blocks
@cindex memory block words
@cindex character strings - moving and copying

Memory blocks often represent character strings; For ways of storing
character strings in memory see @ref{String representations}.  For other
string-processing words see @ref{Displaying characters and strings}.

A few of these words work on address unit blocks.  In that case, you usually
have to insert @code{CHARS} before the word when working on character
strings.  Most words work on character blocks, and expect a char-aligned
address.

When copying characters between overlapping memory regions, use
@code{move}.  @code{Cmove} and @code{cmove>} tend to be slower than a
well-implemented @code{move}.

@findex move ( @var{ c-from c-to ucount --  } ) core
@cindex @code{move}
@kindex move
@format
@code{move} ( @i{c-from c-to ucount -- }) core ``move''
@end format
Copy the contents of @i{ucount} aus at @i{c-from} to @i{c-to}. @code{move}
works correctly even if the two areas overlap.

@findex cmove ( @var{ c-from c-to u --  } ) string
@cindex @code{cmove}
@kindex cmove
@format
@code{cmove} ( @i{c-from c-to u -- }) string ``c-move''
@end format
Copy the contents of @i{ucount} characters from data space at @i{c-from} to
@i{c-to}. The copy proceeds @code{char}-by-@code{char} from low address to
high address; i.e., for overlapping areas it is safe if
@i{c-to}<=@i{c-from}.

@findex cmove> ( @var{ c-from c-to u --  } ) string
@cindex @code{cmove>}
@kindex cmove>
@format
@code{cmove>} ( @i{c-from c-to u -- }) string ``c-move-up''
@end format
Copy the contents of @i{ucount} characters from data space at @i{c-from} to
@i{c-to}. The copy proceeds @code{char}-by-@code{char} from high address to
low address; i.e., for overlapping areas it is safe if @i{c-to}>=@i{c-from}.

@findex fill ( @var{ c-addr u c --  } ) core
@cindex @code{fill}
@kindex fill
@format
@code{fill} ( @i{c-addr u c -- }) core ``fill''
@end format
Store @i{c} in @i{u} chars starting at @i{c-addr}.

@findex erase ( @var{ addr u --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{erase}
@kindex erase
@format
@code{erase} ( @i{addr u --  }) core-ext ``erase''
@end format
Clear all bits in @i{u} aus starting at @i{addr}.


@findex blank ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) string
@cindex @code{blank}
@kindex blank
@format
@code{blank} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) string ``blank''
@end format
Store the space character into @i{u} chars starting at @i{c-addr}.


@findex insert ( @var{ string length buffer size --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{insert}
@kindex insert
@format
@code{insert} ( @i{string length buffer size --  }) gforth-0.7 ``insert''
@end format
inserts a string at the front of a buffer. The remaining bytes are moved on.


@findex delete ( @var{ buffer size u --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{delete}
@kindex delete
@format
@code{delete} ( @i{buffer size u --  }) gforth-0.7 ``delete''
@end format
deletes the first @var{u} bytes from a buffer and fills the rest at the end
with blanks.


@findex compare ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- n  } ) string
@cindex @code{compare}
@kindex compare
@format
@code{compare} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- n }) string ``compare''
@end format
Compare two strings lexicographically, based on the values of the bytes in
the strings (i.e., case-sensitive and without locale-specific collation
order orderings). If they are equal, @i{n} is 0; if the first string is
smaller, @i{n} is -1; if the first string is larger, @i{n} is 1.

@findex pad ( @var{ -- c-addr   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{pad}
@kindex pad
@format
@code{pad} ( @i{-- c-addr  }) core-ext ``pad''
@end format
@var{c-addr} is the address of a transient region that can be used as
temporary data storage. At least 84 characters of space is available.



@comment TODO examples

@node Strings and Characters, Control Structures, Memory, Words
@section Strings and Characters

@menu
* Characters::
* String representations::
* String and character literals::
* String words::
* $tring words::
* Counted string words::     
@end menu

@node Characters, String representations, Strings and Characters, Strings and Characters
@subsection Characters
@cindex Characters - chars/bytes vs. extended characters
@cindex character encoding

Forth supports chars (aka bytes), used by words such as @code{c@@}; these
can be used to represent an ASCII character.

Forth also supports extended characters, which may be represented by a
sequence of several bytes (i.e., several chars).  A common character
encoding is the UTF-8 representation of Unicode.

In general, most code does not have to worry about extended characters: In
the string representation it does not matter whether a byte is a part of an
extended character, or it is a character by itself, and words that consume
chars (like @code{emit}) also work when the extended character is
transferred as a sequence of chars.  Forth still provides words for dealing
with extended characters (@pxref{Xchars and Unicode}).

In Unicode terms, chars are @i{code units}, whereas extended characters are
@i{code points}.  Note that an Unicode @i{abstract character} can consist of
a sequence of code points, but Forth (like other programming languages) has
no data type for individual abstract characters; of course, they can be
represented as strings.

You can use the usual integer words on chars and Xchars on the stack, but
Gforth also has some words for dealing with chars on the stack:

@findex toupper ( @var{ c1 -- c2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{toupper}
@kindex toupper
@format
@code{toupper} ( @i{c1 -- c2 }) gforth-0.2 ``toupper''
@end format
If @i{c1} is a lower-case ASCII character, @i{c2} is the equivalent
upper-case character, otherwise @i{c2} is @i{c1}.


@node String representations, String and character literals, Characters, Strings and Characters
@subsection String representations
@cindex strings - see character strings
@cindex character strings - representations
@cindex counted strings

Forth commonly represents strings as cell pair @i{c-addr u} on the stack;
@i{u} is the length of the string in bytes (aka chars), and @i{c-addr} is
the address of the first byte of the string.  Note that a code point may be
represented by a sequence of several chars in the string (and a Unicode
``abstract character'' may consist of several code points).  @xref{String
words}.

Another string representation is used with the string library of words
containing @code{$}.  It represents the string on the stack through the
address of a cell-sized string handle, which can be located in, e.g., a
variable.  @xref{$tring words}.

A legacy string representation are @dfn{counted strings}, represented on the
stack by @i{c-addr}. The char addressed by @i{c-addr} contains a
character-count, @i{n}, of the string and the string occupies the subsequent
@i{n} char addresses in memory.  Counted strings are limited to 255 bytes in
length.  While counted strings may look attractive due to needing only one
stack item, due to their limitations we recommend avoiding them, especially
as input parameters of words.  @xref{Counted string words}.

@node String and character literals, String words, String representations, Strings and Characters
@subsection String and Character literals
@cindex character literals
@cindex string literals
@cindex literals for characters and strings

The nicest way to write a string literal is to write it as
@code{"@i{STRING}"}.  You can use the same \-escapes inside as for
@code{s\"}.  However, this way is non-standard, so you may want to use one
of the following words for improved portability:

@findex s\" ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time -- c-addr u   } ) core-ext,file-ext
@cindex @code{s\"}
@kindex s\"
@format
@code{s\"} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time -- c-addr u  }) core-ext,file-ext ``s-backslash-quote''
@end format
Like @code{S"}, but translates C-like \-escape-sequences, as follows:
@code{\a} BEL (alert), @code{\b} BS, @code{\e} ESC (not in C99), @code{\f}
FF, @code{\n} newline, @code{\r} CR, @code{\t} HT, @code{\v} VT, @code{\"}
", @code{\\} \, @code{\}[0-7]@{1,3@} octal numerical character value
(non-standard), @code{\x}[0-9a-f]@{0,2@} hex numerical character value
(standard only with two digits), @code{\u}[0-9a-f]@{4@} for unicode
codepoints (auto-merges surrogate pairs), @code{\U}[0-9a-f]@{8@} for
extended unicode code points; a @code{\} before any other character is
reserved.  @* Note that @code{\x}XX produces raw bytes, while @code{\u}XXXX
and @code{\U}XXXXXXXX produce code points for the current encoding.  E.g.,
if we use UTF-8 encoding and want to encode @"a (code point U+00E4), you can
write the letter @"a itself, or write @code{\xc3\xa4} (the UTF-8 bytes for
this code point), @code{\u00e4}, or @code{\U000000e4}.  @* Note that, unlike
in C, @code{\n} produces the preferred newline sequence for the host OS,
which may consist of several chars.  I.e., @code{"\n"} is equivalent to
@code{newline}.


@findex S" ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time -- c-addr u   } ) core,file
@cindex @code{S"}
@kindex S"
@format
@code{S"} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time -- c-addr u  }) core,file ``s-quote''
@end format
Compilation: Parse a string @i{ccc} delimited by a @code{"} (double
quote). At run-time, return the length, @i{u}, and the start address,
@i{c-addr} of the string. Interpretation: parse the string as before, and
return @i{c-addr}, @i{u}. Gforth @code{allocate}s the string. The resulting
memory leak is usually not a problem; the exception is if you create strings
containing @code{S"} and @code{evaluate} them; then the leak is not bounded
by the size of the interpreted files and you may want to @code{free} the
strings.  Forth-2012 only guarantees two buffers of 80 characters each, so
in standard programs you should assume that the string lives only until the
next-but-one @code{s"}.



Likewise, You can get the code @i{xc} of a character @i{C} with
@code{'@i{C}'}.  This way has been standardized since Forth-2012.  An older
way to get it is to use one of the following words:

@findex char ( @var{ '<spaces>ccc' -- c   } ) core,xchar-ext
@cindex @code{char}
@kindex char
@format
@code{char} ( @i{'<spaces>ccc' -- c  }) core,xchar-ext ``char''
@end format
Skip leading spaces. Parse the string @i{ccc} and return @i{c}, the display
code representing the first character of @i{ccc}.


@findex [char] ( @var{ compilation '<spaces>ccc' -- ; run-time -- c   } ) core,xchar-ext
@cindex @code{[char]}
@kindex [char]
@format
@code{[char]} ( @i{compilation '<spaces>ccc' -- ; run-time -- c  }) core,xchar-ext ``bracket-char''
@end format
Compilation: skip leading spaces. Parse the string @i{ccc}. Run-time: return
@i{c}, the display code representing the first character of @i{ccc}.
Interpretation semantics for this word are undefined.



You usually use @code{char} outside and @code{[char]} inside colon
definitions, or you just use @code{'@i{C}'}.

Note that, e.g.,

@example
"C" type
@end example

@noindent
is (slightly) more efficient than

@example
'C' xemit
@end example

@noindent
because the latter converts the code point into a sequence of bytes and
individually @code{emit}s them.  Similarly, dealing with general characters
is usually more efficient when representing them as strings rather than code
points.

There are the following words for producing commonly-used characters and
strings that cannot be produced with @code{S"} or @code{'@i{C}'}:

@findex newline ( @var{ -- c-addr u  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{newline}
@kindex newline
@format
@code{newline} ( @i{-- c-addr u }) gforth-0.5 ``newline''
@end format
String containing the newline sequence of the host OS

@findex bl ( @var{ -- c-char   } ) core
@cindex @code{bl}
@kindex bl
@format
@code{bl} ( @i{-- c-char  }) core ``b-l''
@end format
@i{c-char} is the character value for a space.


@findex #tab ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#tab}
@kindex #tab
@format
@code{#tab} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-tab''
@end format

@findex #lf ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#lf}
@kindex #lf
@format
@code{#lf} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-l-f''
@end format

@findex #cr ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#cr}
@kindex #cr
@format
@code{#cr} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-c-r''
@end format

@findex #ff ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#ff}
@kindex #ff
@format
@code{#ff} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-f-f''
@end format

@findex #bs ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#bs}
@kindex #bs
@format
@code{#bs} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-b-s''
@end format

@findex #del ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#del}
@kindex #del
@format
@code{#del} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-del''
@end format

@findex #bell ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#bell}
@kindex #bell
@format
@code{#bell} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.2 ``number-bell''
@end format

@findex #esc ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{#esc}
@kindex #esc
@format
@code{#esc} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.5 ``number-esc''
@end format

@findex #eof ( @var{ -- c   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{#eof}
@kindex #eof
@format
@code{#eof} ( @i{-- c  }) gforth-0.7 ``number-e-o-f''
@end format
actually EOT (ASCII code 4 aka @code{^D})



@node String words, $tring words, String and character literals, Strings and Characters
@subsection String words

Words that are used for memory blocks are also useful for strings, so for
words that move, copy, compare and search strings, see @ref{Memory
Blocks}. For words that display characters and strings, see @ref{Displaying
characters and strings}.

The following words work on previously existing strings:

@findex str= ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{str=}
@kindex str=
@format
@code{str=} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f  }) gforth-0.6 ``str-equals''
@end format

@findex str< ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{str<}
@kindex str<
@format
@code{str<} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f  }) gforth-0.6 ``str-less-than''
@end format

@findex string-prefix? ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{string-prefix?}
@kindex string-prefix?
@format
@code{string-prefix?} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f  }) gforth-0.6 ``string-prefix-question''
@end format
Is @var{c-addr2 u2} a prefix of @var{c-addr1 u1}?


@findex string-suffix? ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{string-suffix?}
@kindex string-suffix?
@format
@code{string-suffix?} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-suffix-question''
@end format
Is @var{c-addr2 u2} a suffix of @var{c-addr1 u1}?


@findex search ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr3 u3 flag   } ) string
@cindex @code{search}
@kindex search
@format
@code{search} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr3 u3 flag  }) string ``search''
@end format
Search the string specified by @i{c-addr1, u1} for the string specified by
@i{c-addr2, u2}. If @i{flag} is true: match was found at @i{c-addr3} with
@i{u3} characters remaining. If @i{flag} is false: no match was found;
@i{c-addr3, u3} are equal to @i{c-addr1, u1}.


@findex scan ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c -- c-addr2 u2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{scan}
@kindex scan
@format
@code{scan} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c -- c-addr2 u2 }) gforth-0.2 ``scan''
@end format
Skip all characters not equal to c.  The result starts with c or is empty.
@code{Scan} is limited to single-byte (ASCII) characters.  Use @code{search}
to search for multi-byte characters.

@findex scan-back ( @var{ c-addr u1 c -- c-addr u2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{scan-back}
@kindex scan-back
@format
@code{scan-back} ( @i{c-addr u1 c -- c-addr u2  }) gforth-0.7 ``scan-back''
@end format

@findex skip ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c -- c-addr2 u2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{skip}
@kindex skip
@format
@code{skip} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c -- c-addr2 u2 }) gforth-0.2 ``skip''
@end format
Skip all characters equal to c.  The result starts with the first non-c
character, or it is empty.  @code{Scan} is limited to single-byte (ASCII)
characters.

@findex -trailing ( @var{ c_addr u1 -- c_addr u2   } ) string
@cindex @code{-trailing}
@kindex -trailing
@format
@code{-trailing} ( @i{c_addr u1 -- c_addr u2  }) string ``dash-trailing''
@end format
Adjust the string specified by @i{c-addr, u1} to remove all trailing
spaces. @i{u2} is the length of the modified string.


@findex /string ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 n -- c-addr2 u2  } ) string
@cindex @code{/string}
@kindex /string
@format
@code{/string} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 n -- c-addr2 u2 }) string ``slash-string''
@end format
Adjust the string specified by @i{c-addr1, u1} to remove @i{n} characters
from the start of the string.

@findex safe/string ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 n -- c-addr2 u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{safe/string}
@kindex safe/string
@format
@code{safe/string} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 n -- c-addr2 u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``safe-slash-string''
@end format
Adjust the string specified by @i{c-addr1, u1} to remove @i{n} characters
from the start of the string.  Unlike @code{/string}, @code{safe/string}
removes at least 0 and at most @i{u1} characters.

@findex cstring>sstring ( @var{ c-addr -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{cstring>sstring}
@kindex cstring>sstring
@format
@code{cstring>sstring} ( @i{c-addr -- c-addr u  }) gforth-0.2 ``cstring-to-sstring''
@end format
@i{C-addr} is the start address of a zero-terminated string, @i{u} is its
length.



The following words compare case-insensitively for ASCII characters, but
case-sensitively for non-ASCII characters (like in lookup in wordlists).

@findex capscompare ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- n  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{capscompare}
@kindex capscompare
@format
@code{capscompare} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- n }) gforth-0.7 ``capscompare''
@end format
Compare two strings lexicographically, based on the values of the bytes in
the strings, but comparing ASCII characters case-insensitively, and
non-ASCII characters case-sensitively and without locale-specific collation
order. If they are equal, @i{n} is 0; if the first string is smaller, @i{n}
is -1; if the first string is larger, @i{n} is 1. 

@findex capsstring-prefix? ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{capsstring-prefix?}
@kindex capsstring-prefix?
@format
@code{capsstring-prefix?} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- f  }) gforth-1.0 ``capsstring-prefix?''
@end format
Like @code{string-prefix?}, but case-insensitive for ASCII characters: Is
@var{c-addr2 u2} a prefix of @var{c-addr1 u1}?


@findex capssearch ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr3 u3 flag   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{capssearch}
@kindex capssearch
@format
@code{capssearch} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr3 u3 flag  }) gforth-1.0 ``capssearch''
@end format
Like @code{search}, but case-insensitive for ASCII characters: Search for
@i{c-addr2 u2} in @i{c-addr1 u1}; @i{flag} is true if found.



The following words create or extend strings on the heap:

@findex s+ ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{s+}
@kindex s+
@format
@code{s+} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr u  }) gforth-0.7 ``s-plus''
@end format
@i{c-addr u} is a newly @code{allocate}d string that contains the
concatenation of @i{c-addr1 u1} (first) and @i{c-addr2 u2} (second).


@findex append ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{append}
@kindex append
@format
@code{append} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr u  }) gforth-0.7 ``append''
@end format
@i{C-addr u} is the concatenation of @i{c-addr1 u1} (first) and @i{c-addr2
u2} (second).  @i{c-addr1 u1} is an @code{allocate}d string, and
@code{append} @code{resize}s it (possibly moving it to a new address) to
accomodate @i{u} characters.


@findex >string-execute ( @var{ ... xt -- ... addr u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{>string-execute}
@kindex >string-execute
@format
@code{>string-execute} ( @i{... xt -- ... addr u  }) gforth-1.0 ``>string-execute''
@end format
execute xt while the standard output (@code{type}, @code{emit}, and
everything that uses them) is redirected to a string.  The resulting string
is addr u, which is in @code{allocate}d memory; it is the responsibility of
the caller of @code{>string-execute} to @code{free} this string.



One could define @code{s+} using @code{>string-execute}, as follows:

: s+ ( c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- c-addr u )  [: 2swap type type ;]
>string-execute ;

For concatenating just two strings @code{>string-execute} is inefficient,
but for concatenating many strings @code{>string-execute} can be more
efficient.

@node $tring words, Counted string words, String words, Strings and Characters
@subsection $tring words
@cindex string words with $

The following string library stores strings in ordinary cell-size variables
(string handles).  These handles contain a pointer to a cell-counted string
allocated from the heap.  The string library originates from bigFORTH.

Because there is only one permanent reference to the contents (the one in
the handle), the string can be relocated or deleted without worrying about
dangling references; this requires that the programmer uses references
produced by, e.g., @code{$@@} only for temporary purposes, i.e., these
references are not passed out, e.g., as return values or stored in global
memory, and words that may change the handle are not called while these
references exist.

This library is complemented by the cell-pair representation: You use the
$tring words for variable strings which are cumbersome with the c-addr u
representation.  You use the cell-pair representation for processing (e.g.,
inspecting) strings while they do not change.

@findex $! ( @var{ addr1 u $addr --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$!}
@kindex $!
@format
@code{$!} ( @i{addr1 u $addr --  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-store''
@end format
stores a newly allocated string buffer at an address, frees the previous
buffer if necessary.


@findex $@@ ( @var{ $addr -- addr2 u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$@@}
@kindex $@@
@format
@code{$@@} ( @i{$addr -- addr2 u  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-fetch''
@end format
returns the stored string.


@findex $@@len ( @var{ $addr -- u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$@@len}
@kindex $@@len
@format
@code{$@@len} ( @i{$addr -- u  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-fetch-len''
@end format
returns the length of the stored string.


@findex $!len ( @var{ u $addr --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$!len}
@kindex $!len
@format
@code{$!len} ( @i{u $addr --  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-store-len''
@end format
changes the length of the stored string.  Therefore we must change the
memory area and adjust address and count cell as well.


@findex $+!len ( @var{ u $addr -- addr   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$+!len}
@kindex $+!len
@format
@code{$+!len} ( @i{u $addr -- addr  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-plus-store-len''
@end format
make room for u bytes at the end of the memory area referenced by $addr;
addr is the address of the first of these bytes.


@findex $del ( @var{ addr off u --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$del}
@kindex $del
@format
@code{$del} ( @i{addr off u --  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-del''
@end format
deletes @var{u} bytes from a string with offset @var{off}.


@findex $ins ( @var{ addr1 u $addr off --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$ins}
@kindex $ins
@format
@code{$ins} ( @i{addr1 u $addr off --  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-ins''
@end format
inserts a string at offset @var{off}.


@findex $+! ( @var{ addr1 u $addr --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$+!}
@kindex $+!
@format
@code{$+!} ( @i{addr1 u $addr --  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-plus-store''
@end format
appends a string to another.


@findex c$+! ( @var{ char $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c$+!}
@kindex c$+!
@format
@code{c$+!} ( @i{char $addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-string-plus-store''
@end format
append a character to a string.


@findex $free ( @var{ $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$free}
@kindex $free
@format
@code{$free} ( @i{$addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-free''
@end format
free the string pointed to by addr, and set addr to 0


@findex $init ( @var{ $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$init}
@kindex $init
@format
@code{$init} ( @i{$addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-init''
@end format
store an empty string there, regardless of what was in before


@findex $split ( @var{ addr u char -- addr1 u1 addr2 u2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$split}
@kindex $split
@format
@code{$split} ( @i{addr u char -- addr1 u1 addr2 u2  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-split''
@end format
divides a string into two, with one char as separator (e.g. '?' for
arguments in an HTML query)


@findex $iter ( @var{ .. $addr char xt -- ..   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{$iter}
@kindex $iter
@format
@code{$iter} ( @i{.. $addr char xt -- ..  }) gforth-0.7 ``string-iter''
@end format
takes a string apart piece for piece, also with a character as
separator. For each part a passed token will be called. With this you can
take apart arguments -- separated with '&' -- at ease.


@findex $over ( @var{ addr u $addr off --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$over}
@kindex $over
@format
@code{$over} ( @i{addr u $addr off --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-over''
@end format
overwrite string at offset off with addr u


@findex $exec ( @var{ xt addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$exec}
@kindex $exec
@format
@code{$exec} ( @i{xt addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-exec''
@end format
execute xt while the standard output (TYPE, EMIT, and everything that uses
them) is appended to the string variable addr.


@findex $tmp ( @var{ xt -- addr u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$tmp}
@kindex $tmp
@format
@code{$tmp} ( @i{xt -- addr u  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-t-m-p''
@end format
generate a temporary string from the output of a word


@findex $. ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$.}
@kindex $.
@format
@code{$.} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-dot''
@end format
print a string, shortcut


@findex $slurp ( @var{ fid addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$slurp}
@kindex $slurp
@format
@code{$slurp} ( @i{fid addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-slurp''
@end format
Read the file @i{fid} until the end (without closing it) and put the read
data into the string at @i{addr}.


@findex $slurp-file ( @var{ c-addr u addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$slurp-file}
@kindex $slurp-file
@format
@code{$slurp-file} ( @i{c-addr u addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-slurp-file''
@end format
Put all the data in the file named @i{c-addr u} into the string at @i{addr}.


@findex $+slurp ( @var{ fid addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$+slurp}
@kindex $+slurp
@format
@code{$+slurp} ( @i{fid addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-plus-slurp''
@end format
Read the file @i{fid} until the end (without closing it) and append the read
data to the string at @i{addr}.


@findex $+slurp-file ( @var{ c-addr u addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$+slurp-file}
@kindex $+slurp-file
@format
@code{$+slurp-file} ( @i{c-addr u addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-plus+slurp-file''
@end format
Append all the data in the file named @i{c-addr u} to the string at
@i{addr}.


@findex $[] ( @var{ u $[]addr -- addr'   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]}
@kindex $[]
@format
@code{$[]} ( @i{u $[]addr -- addr'  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array''
@end format
@i{Addr'} is the address of the @i{u}th element of the string array
@i{$[]addr}.  The array is resized if needed.


@findex $[]! ( @var{ c-addr u n $[]addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]!}
@kindex $[]!
@format
@code{$[]!} ( @i{c-addr u n $[]addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-store''
@end format
Store string @i{c-addr y} into the string array @i{$[]addr} at index @i{n}.
The array is resized if needed.


@findex $[]+! ( @var{ c-addr u n $[]addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]+!}
@kindex $[]+!
@format
@code{$[]+!} ( @i{c-addr u n $[]addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-plus-store''
@end format
Append the string @i{c-addr u} to the string at index @i{n}.  The array is
resized if needed.  Don't confuse this with @code{$+[]!}.


@findex $+[]! ( @var{ c-addr u $[]addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$+[]!}
@kindex $+[]!
@format
@code{$+[]!} ( @i{c-addr u $[]addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-append-array''
@end format
Store the string @i{c-addr u} as the new last element of string array
@i{$[]addr}.  The array is resized if needed.


@findex $[]@@ ( @var{ n $[]addr -- addr u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]@@}
@kindex $[]@@
@format
@code{$[]@@} ( @i{n $[]addr -- addr u  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-fetch''
@end format
fetch a string from array index @i{n} --- return the zero string if empty,
and don't accidentally grow the array.


@findex $[]# ( @var{ addr -- len   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]#}
@kindex $[]#
@format
@code{$[]#} ( @i{addr -- len  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-num''
@end format
return the number of elements in an array


@findex $[]map ( @var{ addr xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]map}
@kindex $[]map
@format
@code{$[]map} ( @i{addr xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-map''
@end format
execute @var{xt} for all elements of the string array @var{addr}.  xt is
@var{( addr u -- )}, getting one string at a time


@findex $[]slurp ( @var{ fid addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]slurp}
@kindex $[]slurp
@format
@code{$[]slurp} ( @i{fid addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-slurp''
@end format
slurp a file @var{fid} line by line into a string array @var{addr}


@findex $[]slurp-file ( @var{ addr u $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]slurp-file}
@kindex $[]slurp-file
@format
@code{$[]slurp-file} ( @i{addr u $addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-slurp-file''
@end format
slurp a named file @var{addr u} line by line into a string array @var{$addr}


@findex $[]. ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[].}
@kindex $[].
@format
@code{$[].} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-dot''
@end format
print all array entries


@findex $[]free ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]free}
@kindex $[]free
@format
@code{$[]free} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-free''
@end format
addr contains the address of a cell-counted string that contains the
addresses of a number of cell-counted strings; $[]free frees these strings,
frees the array, and sets addr to 0


@findex $save ( @var{ $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$save}
@kindex $save
@format
@code{$save} ( @i{$addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-save''
@end format
push string to dictionary for savesys


@findex $[]save ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]save}
@kindex $[]save
@format
@code{$[]save} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-save''
@end format
push string array to dictionary for savesys


@findex $boot ( @var{ $addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$boot}
@kindex $boot
@format
@code{$boot} ( @i{$addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-boot''
@end format
take string from dictionary to allocated memory.  clean dictionary
afterwards.


@findex $[]boot ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]boot}
@kindex $[]boot
@format
@code{$[]boot} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-boot''
@end format
take string array from dictionary to allocated memory


@findex $saved ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$saved}
@kindex $saved
@format
@code{$saved} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-saved''
@end format
mark an address as booted/saved


@findex $[]saved ( @var{ addr --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]saved}
@kindex $[]saved
@format
@code{$[]saved} ( @i{addr --  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-saved''
@end format
mark an address as booted/saved


@findex $Variable ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$Variable}
@kindex $Variable
@format
@code{$Variable} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-variable''
@end format
A string variable which is preserved across savesystem


@findex $[]Variable ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{$[]Variable}
@kindex $[]Variable
@format
@code{$[]Variable} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-array-variable''
@end format
A string variable which is preserved across savesystem




@node Counted string words, , $tring words, Strings and Characters
@subsection Counted string words

Counted strings store the length as byte at the address pointed to, followed
by the bytes of the string.  Their possible length is severely limited, and
you cannot create a substring in-place without destroying the input string.
Therefore we recommend against using counted strings.  Nevertheless, if you
have to deal with counted strings, here are some words for that:

@findex count ( @var{ c-addr1 -- c-addr2 u  } ) core
@cindex @code{count}
@kindex count
@format
@code{count} ( @i{c-addr1 -- c-addr2 u }) core ``count''
@end format
@i{c-addr2} is the first character and @i{u} the length of the counted
string at @i{c-addr1}.


The following word has no useful interpretation semantics (unlike @code{s"})
and no interpretive counterpart (unlike @code{[char]}), so you should use it
only inside colon definitions (if at all):

@findex C" ( @var{ compilation "ccc<quote>" -- ; run-time  -- c-addr   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{C"}
@kindex C"
@format
@code{C"} ( @i{compilation "ccc<quote>" -- ; run-time  -- c-addr  }) core-ext ``c-quote''
@end format
Compilation: parse a string @i{ccc} delimited by a @code{"} (double
quote). At run-time, return @i{c-addr} which specifies the counted string
@i{ccc}.  Interpretation semantics are undefined.



doc-place
@findex string, ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{string,}
@kindex string,
@format
@code{string,} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``string,''
@end format
puts down string as cstring



@node Control Structures, Defining Words, Strings and Characters, Words
@section Control Structures
@cindex control structures

Control structures in Forth cannot be used interpretively, only in a colon
definition@footnote{To be precise, they have no interpretation semantics
(@pxref{Interpretation and Compilation Semantics}).}. We do not like this
limitation, but have not seen a satisfying way around it yet, although many
schemes have been proposed.

@menu
* Selection::                IF ... ELSE ... ENDIF
* Simple Loops::             BEGIN ...
* Counted Loops::            DO
* BEGIN loops with multiple exits::
* General control structures with CASE::
* Arbitrary control structures::
* Calls and returns::
* Exception Handling::       
@end menu

@node Selection, Simple Loops, Control Structures, Control Structures
@subsection Selection
@cindex selection control structures
@cindex control structures for selection

@cindex @code{IF} control structure
@example
@i{flag}
IF
  @i{code}
ENDIF
@end example
@noindent

If @i{flag} is non-zero (as far as @code{IF} etc. are concerned, a cell with
any bit set represents truth) @i{code} is executed.

@example
@i{flag}
IF
  @i{code1}
ELSE
  @i{code2}
ENDIF
@end example

If @var{flag} is true, @i{code1} is executed, otherwise @i{code2} is
executed.

You can use @code{THEN} instead of @code{ENDIF}. Indeed, @code{THEN} is
standard, and @code{ENDIF} is not, although it is quite popular. We
recommend using @code{ENDIF}, because it is less confusing for people who
also know other languages (and is not prone to reinforcing negative
prejudices against Forth in these people). Adding @code{ENDIF} to a system
that only supplies @code{THEN} is simple:
@example
: ENDIF   POSTPONE then ; immediate
@end example

[According to @cite{Webster's New Encyclopedic Dictionary}, @dfn{then
(adv.)} has the following meanings:
@quotation
... 2b: following next after in order ... 3d: as a necessary consequence (if
you were there, then you saw them).
@end quotation
Forth's @code{THEN} has the meaning 2b, whereas @code{THEN} in Pascal and
many other programming languages has the meaning 3d.]

Gforth also provides the words @code{?DUP-IF} and @code{?DUP-0=-IF}, so you
can avoid using @code{?dup}. Using these alternatives is also more efficient
than using @code{?dup}. Definitions in Standard Forth for @code{ENDIF},
@code{?DUP-IF} and @code{?DUP-0=-IF} are provided in
@file{compat/control.fs}.

@cindex @code{CASE} control structure
@example
@i{x}
CASE
  @i{x1} OF @i{code1} ENDOF
  @i{x2} OF @i{code2} ENDOF
  @dots{}
  ( x ) @i{default-code} ( x )
ENDCASE ( )
@end example

Executes the first @i{codei}, where the @i{xi} is equal to @i{x}.  If no
@i{xi} matches, the optional @i{default-code} is executed. The optional
default case can be added by simply writing the code after the last
@code{ENDOF}. It may use @i{x}, which is on top of the stack, but must not
consume it.  The value @i{x} is consumed by this construction (either by an
@code{OF} that matches, or by the @code{ENDCASE}, if no OF matches).
Example:

@example
: num-name ( n -- c-addr u )
 case
   0 of s" zero " endof
   1 of s" one "  endof
   2 of s" two "  endof
   \ default case:
   s" other number" 
   rot \ get n on top so ENDCASE can drop it
 endcase ;
@end example

You can also use (the non-standard) @code{?of} to use @code{case} as a
general selection structure for more than two alternatives.  @code{?Of}
takes a flag.  Example:

@example
: sgn ( n1 -- n2 )
    \ sign function
    case
	dup 0< ?of drop -1 endof
	dup 0> ?of drop 1 endof
	dup \ n1=0 -> n2=0; dup an item, to be consumed by ENDCASE
    endcase ;
@end example

@progstyle To keep the code understandable, you should ensure that you
change the stack in the same way (wrt. number and types of stack items
consumed and pushed) on all paths through a selection structure.

@node Simple Loops, Counted Loops, Selection, Control Structures
@subsection Simple Loops
@cindex simple loops
@cindex loops without count

@cindex @code{WHILE} loop
@example
BEGIN
  @i{code1}
  @i{flag}
WHILE
  @i{code2}
REPEAT
@end example

@i{code1} is executed and @i{flag} is computed. If it is true, @i{code2} is
executed and the loop is restarted; If @i{flag} is false, execution
continues after the @code{REPEAT}.

@cindex @code{UNTIL} loop
@example
BEGIN
  @i{code}
  @i{flag}
UNTIL
@end example

@i{code} is executed. The loop is restarted if @code{flag} is false.

@progstyle To keep the code understandable, a complete iteration of the loop
should not change the number and types of the items on the stacks.

@cindex endless loop
@cindex loops, endless
@example
BEGIN
  @i{code}
AGAIN
@end example

This is an endless loop.


@node Counted Loops, BEGIN loops with multiple exits, Simple Loops, Control Structures
@subsection Counted Loops
@cindex counted loops
@cindex loops, counted
@cindex @code{DO} loops

The basic counted loop is:
@example
@i{limit} @i{start} ?DO
  @i{body}
LOOP
@end example

This performs one iteration for every integer, starting from @i{start} and
up to, but excluding @i{limit}. The counter, or @i{index}, can be accessed
with @code{i}. For example, the loop:
@example
10 0 ?DO
  i .
LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9}

The index of the innermost loop can be accessed with @code{i}, the index of
the next loop with @code{j}, and the index of the third loop with @code{k}.

You can access the limit of the innermost loop with @code{i'} and
@code{i'}-@code{i} with @code{delta-i}.  E.g., running

@example
: foo 7 5 ?do cr i . i' . delta-i . loop ; 
@end example

prints

@example
5 7 2 
6 7 1
@end example

The loop control data are kept on the return stack, so there are some
restrictions on mixing return stack accesses and counted loop words. In
particuler, if you put values on the return stack outside the loop, you
cannot read them inside the loop@footnote{well, not in a way that is
portable.}. If you put values on the return stack within a loop, you have to
remove them before the end of the loop and before accessing the index of the
loop.

There are several variations on the counted loop:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{LEAVE} leaves the innermost counted loop immediately; execution
continues after the associated @code{LOOP} or @code{NEXT}. For example:

@example
10 0 ?DO  i DUP . 3 = IF LEAVE THEN LOOP
@end example
prints @code{0 1 2 3}


@item
@code{UNLOOP} prepares for an abnormal loop exit, e.g., via
@code{EXIT}. @code{UNLOOP} removes the loop control parameters from the
return stack so @code{EXIT} can get to its return address. For example:

@example
: demo 10 0 ?DO i DUP . 3 = IF UNLOOP EXIT THEN LOOP ." Done" ;
@end example
prints @code{0 1 2 3}


@item
If @i{start} is greater than @i{limit}, a @code{?DO} loop is entered (and
@code{LOOP} iterates until they become equal by wrap-around
arithmetic). This behaviour is usually not what you want. Therefore, Gforth
offers @code{+DO} and @code{U+DO} (as replacements for @code{?DO}), which do
not enter the loop if @i{start} is greater than @i{limit}; @code{+DO} is for
signed loop parameters, @code{U+DO} for unsigned loop parameters.

@item
@code{?DO} can be replaced by @code{DO}. @code{DO} always enters the loop,
independent of the loop parameters. Do not use @code{DO}, even if you know
that the loop is entered in any case. Such knowledge tends to become invalid
during maintenance of a program, and then the @code{DO} will make trouble.

@item
@code{LOOP} can be replaced with @code{@i{n} +LOOP}; this updates the index
by @i{n} instead of by 1. The loop is terminated when the border between
@i{limit-1} and @i{limit} is crossed. E.g.:

@example
4 0 +DO  i .  2 +LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{0 2}

@example
4 1 +DO  i .  2 +LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{1 3}

@item
@cindex negative increment for counted loops
@cindex counted loops with negative increment
The behaviour of @code{@i{n} +LOOP} is peculiar when @i{n} is negative:

@example
-1 0 ?DO  i .  -1 +LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{0 -1}

@example
0 0 ?DO  i .  -1 +LOOP
@end example
prints nothing.

We recommend not combining @code{?DO} with @code{+LOOP}.  Gforth offers
several alternatives:

If you want @code{-1 +LOOP}'s behaviour of including an iteration where
@code{I}=limit, start the loop with @code{-[DO} or @code{U-[DO} (where the
@code{[} is inspired by the mathematical notation for inclusive ranges,
e.g., [1,n]):

@example
-1 0 -[DO  i .  -1 +LOOP
@end example

prints @code{0 -1}.

@example
0 0 -[DO  i .  -1 +LOOP
@end example

prints @code{0}.

@example
0 -1 -[DO  i .  -1 +LOOP
@end example

prints nothing.

If you want to exclude the limit, you instead use @code{1 -LOOP} (or
generally @code{@i{u} -LOOP}) and start the loop with @code{?DO}, @code{-DO}
or @code{U-DO}.  @code{-LOOP} terminates the loop when the border between
@i{limit+1} and @i{limit} is crossed.  E.g.:

@example
-2 0 -DO  i .  1 -LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{0 -1}

@example
-1 0 -DO  i .  1 -LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints @code{0}

@example
0 0 -DO  i .  1 -LOOP
@end example
@noindent
prints nothing.

Unfortunately, @code{+DO}, @code{U+DO}, @code{-DO}, @code{U-DO} and
@code{-LOOP} are not defined in Standard Forth. However, an implementation
for these words that uses only standard words is provided in
@file{compat/loops.fs}.

@item
@cindex iterate over array
@cindex array, iterating over
A common task is to iterate over the elements of an array, forwards or
backwards.  Iterating over the addresses of the elements has two benefits:
It avoids the need to keep the start address of the array around, reducing
the data stack load; and it avoids the need to perform address computations
in every iteration.  The disadvantage is that, starting with the usual array
representations @i{addr uelems} or @i{addr ubytes}, some processing is
required to produce a start and limit address.  Gforth has @code{bounds} for
getting there from the @i{addr ubytes} representation, so you can write a
forward loop through a cell array @code{v} as:

@example
create v 1 , 3 , 7 ,
: foo v 3 cells bounds U+DO i @ . cell +LOOP ;
foo
@end example

which prints @code{1 3 7}.  Preprocessing the inputs for walking backwards
is more involved, so Gforth provide a loop construct of the form
@code{MEM-DO}...@code{LOOP} that does it for you: It takes an array in
@i{addr ubytes} representation and the element size, and iterates over the
addresses of the elements in backwards order:

@example
create v 1 , 3 , 7 ,
: foo1 v 3 cell array>mem MEM-DO i @ . LOOP ;
foo1
@end example

This prints @code{7 3 1}.  @code{ARRAY>MEM} converts the @i{addr uelems
uelemsize} representation into the @i{addr ubytes uelemsize} representation
expected by @code{MEM-DO}.  This loop is finished with @code{LOOP} which
decrements by @i{uelemsize} when it finishes a @code{MEM-DO}.

Gforth also adds @code{MEM+DO} for completeness.  It takes the same
parameters as @code{MEM-DO}, but walks forwards through the array:

@example
create v 1 , 3 , 7 ,
: foo2 v 3 cell array>mem MEM+DO i @ . LOOP ;
foo2
@end example

prints @code{1 3 7}.

@item
@cindex @code{FOR} loops
Another counted loop is:
@example
@i{n}
FOR
  @i{body}
NEXT
@end example
This is the preferred loop of native code compiler writers who are too lazy
to optimize @code{?DO} loops properly. This loop structure is not defined in
Standard Forth. In Gforth, this loop iterates @i{n+1} times; @code{i}
produces values starting with @i{n} and ending with 0. Other Forth systems
may behave differently, even if they support @code{FOR} loops. To avoid
problems, don't use @code{FOR} loops.

@end itemize

The counted-loop words are:

@findex ?DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time w1 w2 -- | loop-sys   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{?DO}
@kindex ?DO
@format
@code{?DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time w1 w2 -- | loop-sys  }) core-ext ``question-do''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex +DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{+DO}
@kindex +DO
@format
@code{+DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-0.2 ``plus-do''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex U+DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{U+DO}
@kindex U+DO
@format
@code{U+DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-0.2 ``u-plus-do''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex bounds ( @var{ u1 u2 -- u3 u1  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{bounds}
@kindex bounds
@format
@code{bounds} ( @i{u1 u2 -- u3 u1 }) gforth-0.2 ``bounds''
@end format
Given a memory block represented by starting address @i{addr} and length
@i{u} in aus, produce the end address @i{addr+u} and the start address in
the right order for @code{u+do} or @code{?do}.

@findex -[do ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{-[do}
@kindex -[do
@format
@code{-[do} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-experimental ``minus-bracket-do''
@end format
Start of a counted loop with negative stride; Skips the loop if
@i{n2}<@i{n1}; such a counted loop ends with @code{+loop} where the
increment is negative; it runs as long as @code{I}>=@i{n1}.


@findex u-[do ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{u-[do}
@kindex u-[do
@format
@code{u-[do} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-experimental ``u-minus-bracket-do''
@end format
Start of a counted loop with negative stride; Skips the loop if
@i{u2}<@i{u1}; such a counted loop ends with @code{+loop} where the
increment is negative; it runs as long as @code{I}>=@i{u1}.


@findex -DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{-DO}
@kindex -DO
@format
@code{-DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time n1 n2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-0.2 ``minus-do''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex U-DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{U-DO}
@kindex U-DO
@format
@code{U-DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u1 u2 -- | loop-sys  }) gforth-0.2 ``u-minus-do''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


doc-array>mem
@findex mem+do ( @var{ compilation -- w xt do-sys; run-time addr ubytes +nstride --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{mem+do}
@kindex mem+do
@format
@code{mem+do} ( @i{compilation -- w xt do-sys; run-time addr ubytes +nstride --  }) gforth-experimental ``mem-plus-do''
@end format
Starts a counted loop that starts with @code{I} as @i{addr} and then steps
upwards through memory with @i{nstride} wide steps as long as
@code{I}<@i{addr}+@i{ubytes}.  Must be finished with @i{loop}.


@findex mem-do ( @var{ compilation -- w xt do-sys; run-time addr ubytes +nstride --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{mem-do}
@kindex mem-do
@format
@code{mem-do} ( @i{compilation -- w xt do-sys; run-time addr ubytes +nstride --  }) gforth-experimental ``mem-minus-do''
@end format
Starts a counted loop that starts with @code{I} as
@i{addr}+@i{ubytes}-@i{ustride} and then steps backwards through memory with
-@i{nstride} wide steps as long as @code{I}>=@i{addr}.  Must be finished
with @i{loop}.


@findex DO ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time w1 w2 -- loop-sys   } ) core
@cindex @code{DO}
@kindex DO
@format
@code{DO} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time w1 w2 -- loop-sys  }) core ``DO''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex FOR ( @var{ compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u -- loop-sys   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{FOR}
@kindex FOR
@format
@code{FOR} ( @i{compilation -- do-sys ; run-time u -- loop-sys  }) gforth-0.2 ``FOR''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex LOOP ( @var{ compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 -- | loop-sys2   } ) core
@cindex @code{LOOP}
@kindex LOOP
@format
@code{LOOP} ( @i{compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 -- | loop-sys2  }) core ``LOOP''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex +LOOP ( @var{ compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 n -- | loop-sys2   } ) core
@cindex @code{+LOOP}
@kindex +LOOP
@format
@code{+LOOP} ( @i{compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 n -- | loop-sys2  }) core ``plus-loop''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex -LOOP ( @var{ compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 u -- | loop-sys2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{-LOOP}
@kindex -LOOP
@format
@code{-LOOP} ( @i{compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 u -- | loop-sys2  }) gforth-0.2 ``minus-loop''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex NEXT ( @var{ compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 -- | loop-sys2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{NEXT}
@kindex NEXT
@format
@code{NEXT} ( @i{compilation do-sys -- ; run-time loop-sys1 -- | loop-sys2  }) gforth-0.2 ``NEXT''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex i ( @var{ R:n -- R:n n  } ) core
@cindex @code{i}
@kindex i
@format
@code{i} ( @i{R:n -- R:n n }) core ``i''
@end format
@i{n} is the index of the innermost counted loop.

@findex j ( @var{ R:n R:w1 R:w2 -- n R:n R:w1 R:w2  } ) core
@cindex @code{j}
@kindex j
@format
@code{j} ( @i{R:n R:w1 R:w2 -- n R:n R:w1 R:w2 }) core ``j''
@end format
@i{n} is the index of the next-to-innermost counted loop.

@findex k ( @var{ R:n R:w1 R:w2 R:w3 R:w4 -- n R:n R:w1 R:w2 R:w3 R:w4  } ) gforth-0.3
@cindex @code{k}
@kindex k
@format
@code{k} ( @i{R:n R:w1 R:w2 R:w3 R:w4 -- n R:n R:w1 R:w2 R:w3 R:w4 }) gforth-0.3 ``k''
@end format
@i{n} is the index of the third-innermost counted loop.

@findex i' ( @var{ R:w R:w2 -- R:w R:w2 w  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{i'}
@kindex i'
@format
@code{i'} ( @i{R:w R:w2 -- R:w R:w2 w }) gforth-0.2 ``i-tick''
@end format
The limit of the innermost counted loop

@findex delta-i ( @var{ r:ulimit r:u -- r:ulimit r:u u2  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{delta-i}
@kindex delta-i
@format
@code{delta-i} ( @i{r:ulimit r:u -- r:ulimit r:u u2 }) gforth-1.0 ``delta-i''
@end format
@i{u2}=@code{I'}-@code{I} (difference between limit and index).

@findex LEAVE ( @var{ compilation -- ; run-time loop-sys --   } ) core
@cindex @code{LEAVE}
@kindex LEAVE
@format
@code{LEAVE} ( @i{compilation -- ; run-time loop-sys --  }) core ``LEAVE''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex ?LEAVE ( @var{ compilation -- ; run-time f | f loop-sys --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{?LEAVE}
@kindex ?LEAVE
@format
@code{?LEAVE} ( @i{compilation -- ; run-time f | f loop-sys --  }) gforth-0.2 ``question-leave''
@end format
@xref{Counted Loops}.


@findex unloop ( @var{ R:w1 R:w2 --  } ) core
@cindex @code{unloop}
@kindex unloop
@format
@code{unloop} ( @i{R:w1 R:w2 -- }) core ``unloop''
@end format

@findex DONE ( @var{ compilation do-sys -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{DONE}
@kindex DONE
@format
@code{DONE} ( @i{compilation do-sys -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-0.2 ``DONE''
@end format
resolves all LEAVEs up to the do-sys




The standard does not allow using @code{CS-PICK} and @code{CS-ROLL} on
@i{do-sys}. Gforth allows it, except for the do-sys produced by
@code{MEM+DO} and @code{MEM-DO}, but it's your job to ensure that for every
@code{?DO} etc. there is exactly one @code{UNLOOP} on any path through the
definition (@code{LOOP} etc. compile an @code{UNLOOP} on the fall-through
path). Also, you have to ensure that all @code{LEAVE}s are resolved (by
using one of the loop-ending words or @code{DONE}).

@node BEGIN loops with multiple exits, General control structures with CASE, Counted Loops, Control Structures
@subsection @code{Begin} loops with multiple exits
@cindex Multiple exits from @code{begin}

For counted loops, you can use @code{leave} in several places.  For
@code{begin} loops, you have the following options:

Use @code{exit} (possibly several times) in the loop to leave not just the
loop, but the whole colon definition.  E.g.,:

@example
: foo
  begin
    condition1 while
      condition2 if
        exit-code2 exit then
      condition3 if
        exit-code3 exit then
    ...
  repeat
  exit-code1 ;
@end example
  
The disadvantage of this approach is that, if you want to have some common
code afterwards, you either have to wrap @code{foo} in another word that
contains the common code, or you have to call the common code several times,
from each exit-code.

Another approach is to use several @code{while}s in a @code{begin} loop.
You have to append a @code{then} behind the loop for every additional
@code{while}.  E.g.,;

@example
begin
  condition1 while
    condition2 while
      condition3 while
again then then then
@end example

Here I used @code{again} at the end of the loop so that I would have a
@code{then} for each @code{while}; @code{repeat} would result in one less
@code{then}, but otherwise the same behaviour.  For an explanation of why
this works, @xref{Arbitrary control structures}.

We can have common code afterwards, but, as presented above, we cannot have
different exit-codes for the different exits.  You can have these different
exit-codes, as follows:

@example
begin
  condition1 while
    condition2 while
      condition3 while
again then exit-code3
else exit-code2 then
else exit-code1 then
@end example

This is relatively hard to comprehend, because the exit-codes are relatively
far from the exit conditions (it does not help that we are not used to such
control structures, either).

@node General control structures with CASE, Arbitrary control structures, BEGIN loops with multiple exits, Control Structures
@subsection General control structures with @code{case}
@cindex @code{case} as generalized control structure
@cindex general control structures (@code{case})

Gforth provides an extended @code{case} that solves the problems of the
multi-exit loops discussed above, and offers additional options.  You can
find a portable implementation of this extended @code{case} in
@file{compat/caseext.fs}.

There are three additional words in the extension.  The first is @code{?of}
which allows general tests (rather than just testing for equality) in a
@code{case}; e.g.,

@example
: sgn ( n -- -1|0|1 )
  ( n ) case
    dup 0 < ?of drop -1 endof
    dup 0 > ?of drop 1  endof
    \ otherwise leave the 0 on the stack
  0 endcase ;
@end example

Note that @code{endcase} drops a value, which works fine much of the time
with @code{of}, but usually not with @code{?of}, so we leave a 0 on the
stack for @code{endcase} to drop.  The n that is passed into @code{sgn} is
also 0 if neither @code{?of} triggers, and that is then passed out.

The second additional word is @code{next-case}, which allows turning
@code{case} into a loop.  Our triple-exit loop becomes:

@example
case
  condition1 ?of exit-code1 endof
  condition2 ?of exit-code2 endof
  condition3 ?of exit-code3 endof
  ...
next-case
common code afterwards
@end example

As you can see, this solves both problems of the variants discussed above
(@pxref{BEGIN loops with multiple exits}).  Note that @code{next-case} does
not drop a value, unlike @code{endcase}.@footnote{@code{Next-case} has a
@code{-}, unlike the other @code{case} words, because VFX Forth contains a
@code{nextcase} that drops a value.}

The last additional word is @code{contof}, which is used instead of
@code{endof} and starts the next iteration instead of leaving the loop.
This can be used in ways similar to Dijkstra's guarded command @i{do}, e.g.:

@example
: gcd ( n1 n2 -- n )
    case
        2dup > ?of tuck - contof
        2dup < ?of over - contof
    endcase ;
@end example

Here the two @code{?of}s have different ways of continuing the loop; when
neither @code{?of} triggers, the two numbers are equal and are the gcd.
@code{Endcase} drops one of them, leaving the other as n.

You can also combine these words.  Here's an example that uses each of the
@code{case} words once, except @code{endcase}:

@example
: collatz ( u -- )
    \ print the 3n+1 sequence starting at u until we reach 1
    case
        dup .
        1 of endof
        dup 1 and ?of 3 * 1+ contof
        2/
    next-case ;
@end example

This example keeps the current value of the sequence on the stack.  If it is
1, the @code{of} triggers, drops the value, and leaves the @code{case}
structure.  For odd numbers, the @code{?of} triggers, computes 3n+1, and
starts the next iteration with @code{contof}.  Otherwise, if the number is
even, it is divided by 2, and the loop is restarted with @code{next-case}.

@node Arbitrary control structures, Calls and returns, General control structures with CASE, Control Structures
@subsection Arbitrary control structures
@cindex control structures, user-defined

@cindex control-flow stack
Standard Forth permits and supports using control structures in a non-nested
way. Information about incomplete control structures is stored on the
control-flow stack. This stack may be implemented on the Forth data stack,
and this is what we have done in Gforth.

@cindex @code{orig}, control-flow stack item
@cindex @code{dest}, control-flow stack item
An @i{orig} entry represents an unresolved forward branch, a @i{dest} entry
represents a backward branch target. A few words are the basis for building
any control structure possible (except control structures that need storage,
like calls, coroutines, and backtracking).


@findex IF ( @var{ compilation -- orig ; run-time f --   } ) core
@cindex @code{IF}
@kindex IF
@format
@code{IF} ( @i{compilation -- orig ; run-time f --  }) core ``IF''
@end format
At run-time, if @i{f}=0, execution continues after the @code{THEN} (or
@code{ELSE}) that consumes the @i{orig}, otherwise right after the @code{IF}
(@pxref{Selection}).


@findex AHEAD ( @var{ compilation -- orig ; run-time --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{AHEAD}
@kindex AHEAD
@format
@code{AHEAD} ( @i{compilation -- orig ; run-time --  }) tools-ext ``AHEAD''
@end format
At run-time, execution continues after the @code{THEN} that consumes the
@i{orig}.


@findex THEN ( @var{ compilation orig -- ; run-time --   } ) core
@cindex @code{THEN}
@kindex THEN
@format
@code{THEN} ( @i{compilation orig -- ; run-time --  }) core ``THEN''
@end format
The @code{IF}, @code{AHEAD}, @code{ELSE} or @code{WHILE} that pushed
@i{orig} jumps right after the @code{THEN} (@pxref{Selection}).


@findex BEGIN ( @var{ compilation -- dest ; run-time --   } ) core
@cindex @code{BEGIN}
@kindex BEGIN
@format
@code{BEGIN} ( @i{compilation -- dest ; run-time --  }) core ``BEGIN''
@end format
The @code{UNTIL}, @code{AGAIN} or @code{REPEAT} that consumes the @i{dest}
jumps right behind the @code{BEGIN} (@pxref{Simple Loops}).


@findex UNTIL ( @var{ compilation dest -- ; run-time f --   } ) core
@cindex @code{UNTIL}
@kindex UNTIL
@format
@code{UNTIL} ( @i{compilation dest -- ; run-time f --  }) core ``UNTIL''
@end format
At run-time, if @i{f}=0, execution continues after the @code{BEGIN} that
produced @i{dest}, otherwise right after the @code{UNTIL} (@pxref{Simple
Loops}).


@findex AGAIN ( @var{ compilation dest -- ; run-time --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{AGAIN}
@kindex AGAIN
@format
@code{AGAIN} ( @i{compilation dest -- ; run-time --  }) core-ext ``AGAIN''
@end format
At run-time, execution continues after the @code{BEGIN} that produced the
@i{dest} (@pxref{Simple Loops}).


@findex CS-PICK ( @var{ orig0/dest0 orig1/dest1 ... origu/destu u -- ... orig0/dest0   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{CS-PICK}
@kindex CS-PICK
@format
@code{CS-PICK} ( @i{orig0/dest0 orig1/dest1 ... origu/destu u -- ... orig0/dest0  }) tools-ext ``c-s-pick''
@end format

@findex CS-ROLL ( @var{ destu/origu .. dest0/orig0 u -- .. dest0/orig0 destu/origu   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{CS-ROLL}
@kindex CS-ROLL
@format
@code{CS-ROLL} ( @i{destu/origu .. dest0/orig0 u -- .. dest0/orig0 destu/origu  }) tools-ext ``c-s-roll''
@end format

@findex CS-DROP ( @var{ dest --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{CS-DROP}
@kindex CS-DROP
@format
@code{CS-DROP} ( @i{dest --  }) gforth-1.0 ``CS-DROP''
@end format


The Standard words @code{CS-PICK} and @code{CS-ROLL} allow you to manipulate
the control-flow stack in a portable way. Without them, you would need to
know how many stack items are occupied by a control-flow entry (many systems
use one cell. In Gforth they currently take three, but this may change in
the future).

@code{CS-PICK} can only pick a dest and @code{CS-DROP} can only drop a dest,
because an orig must be resolved exactly once.

Some standard control structure words are built from these words:


@findex ELSE ( @var{ compilation orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time --   } ) core
@cindex @code{ELSE}
@kindex ELSE
@format
@code{ELSE} ( @i{compilation orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time --  }) core ``ELSE''
@end format
At run-time, execution continues after the @code{THEN} that consumes the
@i{orig}; the @code{IF}, @code{AHEAD}, @code{ELSE} or @code{WHILE} that
pushed @i{orig1} jumps right after the @code{ELSE}.  (@pxref{Selection}).


@findex WHILE ( @var{ compilation dest -- orig dest ; run-time f --   } ) core
@cindex @code{WHILE}
@kindex WHILE
@format
@code{WHILE} ( @i{compilation dest -- orig dest ; run-time f --  }) core ``WHILE''
@end format
At run-time, if @i{f}=0, execution continues after the @code{REPEAT} (or
@code{THEN} or @code{ELSE}) that consumes the @i{orig}, otherwise right
after the @code{WHILE} (@pxref{Simple Loops}).


@findex REPEAT ( @var{ compilation orig dest -- ; run-time --   } ) core
@cindex @code{REPEAT}
@kindex REPEAT
@format
@code{REPEAT} ( @i{compilation orig dest -- ; run-time --  }) core ``REPEAT''
@end format
At run-time, execution continues after the @code{BEGIN} that produced the
@i{dest}; the @code{WHILE}, @code{IF}, @code{AHEAD} or @code{ELSE} that
pushed @i{orig} jumps right after the @code{REPEAT}.  (@pxref{Simple
Loops}).




@noindent
Gforth adds some more control-structure words:


@findex ENDIF ( @var{ compilation orig -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ENDIF}
@kindex ENDIF
@format
@code{ENDIF} ( @i{compilation orig -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-0.2 ``ENDIF''
@end format
Same as @code{THEN}.


@findex ?dup-IF ( @var{ compilation -- orig ; run-time n -- n|   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{?dup-IF}
@kindex ?dup-IF
@format
@code{?dup-IF} ( @i{compilation -- orig ; run-time n -- n|  }) gforth-0.2 ``question-dupe-if''
@end format
This is the preferred alternative to the idiom "@code{?DUP IF}", since it
can be better handled by tools like stack checkers. Besides, it's faster.


@findex ?DUP-0=-IF ( @var{ compilation -- orig ; run-time n -- n|   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{?DUP-0=-IF}
@kindex ?DUP-0=-IF
@format
@code{?DUP-0=-IF} ( @i{compilation -- orig ; run-time n -- n|  }) gforth-0.2 ``question-dupe-zero-equals-if''
@end format


@noindent
Another group of control structure words are:


@findex case ( @var{ compilation  -- case-sys ; run-time  --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{case}
@kindex case
@format
@code{case} ( @i{compilation  -- case-sys ; run-time  --  }) core-ext ``case''
@end format
Start a @code{case} structure.


@findex endcase ( @var{ compilation case-sys -- ; run-time x --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{endcase}
@kindex endcase
@format
@code{endcase} ( @i{compilation case-sys -- ; run-time x --  }) core-ext ``end-case''
@end format
Finish the @code{case} structure; drop x, and continue behind the
@code{endcase}.  Dropping x is useful in the original @code{case} construct
(with only @code{of}s), but you may have to supply an x in other cases
(especially when using @code{?of}).


@findex next-case ( @var{ compilation case-sys -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{next-case}
@kindex next-case
@format
@code{next-case} ( @i{compilation case-sys -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-1.0 ``next-case''
@end format
Restart the @code{case} loop by jumping to the matching @code{case}.  Note
that @code{next-case} does not drop a cell, unlike @code{endcase}.


@findex of ( @var{ compilation  -- of-sys ; run-time x1 x2 -- |x1   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{of}
@kindex of
@format
@code{of} ( @i{compilation  -- of-sys ; run-time x1 x2 -- |x1  }) core-ext ``of''
@end format
If x1=x2, continue (dropping both); otherwise, leave x1 on the stack and
jump behind @code{endof} or @code{contof}.


@findex ?of ( @var{ compilation  -- of-sys ; run-time  f --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{?of}
@kindex ?of
@format
@code{?of} ( @i{compilation  -- of-sys ; run-time  f --  }) gforth-1.0 ``question-of''
@end format
If f is true, continue; otherwise, jump behind @code{endof} or
@code{contof}.


@findex endof ( @var{ compilation case-sys1 of-sys -- case-sys2 ; run-time  --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{endof}
@kindex endof
@format
@code{endof} ( @i{compilation case-sys1 of-sys -- case-sys2 ; run-time  --  }) core-ext ``end-of''
@end format
Exit the enclosing @code{case} structure by jumping behind
@code{endcase}/@code{next-case}.


@findex contof ( @var{ compilation case-sys1 of-sys -- case-sys2 ; run-time  --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{contof}
@kindex contof
@format
@code{contof} ( @i{compilation case-sys1 of-sys -- case-sys2 ; run-time  --  }) gforth-1.0 ``cont-of''
@end format
Restart the @code{case} loop by jumping to the enclosing @code{case}.



Internally, @i{of-sys} is an @code{orig}; and @i{case-sys} is a cell and
some stack-depth information, 0 or more @code{orig}s, and a @code{dest}.

@subsubsection Programming Style
@cindex control structures programming style
@cindex programming style, arbitrary control structures

In order to ensure readability we recommend that you do not create arbitrary
control structures directly, but define new control structure words for the
control structure you want and use these words in your program. For example,
instead of writing:

@example
BEGIN
  ...
IF [ 1 CS-ROLL ]
  ...
AGAIN THEN
@end example

@noindent
we recommend defining control structure words, e.g.,

@example
: WHILE ( DEST -- ORIG DEST )
 POSTPONE IF
 1 CS-ROLL ; immediate

: REPEAT ( orig dest -- )
 POSTPONE AGAIN
 POSTPONE THEN ; immediate
@end example

@noindent
and then using these to create the control structure:

@example
BEGIN
  ...
WHILE
  ...
REPEAT
@end example

That's much easier to read, isn't it? Of course, @code{REPEAT} and
@code{WHILE} are predefined, so in this example it would not be necessary to
define them.

@node Calls and returns, Exception Handling, Arbitrary control structures, Control Structures
@subsection Calls and returns
@cindex calling a definition
@cindex returning from a definition

@cindex recursive definitions
A definition can be called simply be writing the name of the definition to
be called. Normally a definition is invisible during its own definition. If
you want to write a directly recursive definition, you can use
@code{recursive} to make the current definition visible, or @code{recurse}
to call the current definition directly.


@findex recursive ( @var{ compilation -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{recursive}
@kindex recursive
@format
@code{recursive} ( @i{compilation -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-0.2 ``recursive''
@end format
Make the current definition visible, enabling it to call itself recursively.


@findex recurse ( @var{ ... -- ...   } ) core
@cindex @code{recurse}
@kindex recurse
@format
@code{recurse} ( @i{... -- ...  }) core ``recurse''
@end format
Alias to the current definition.



@noindent For examples of using these words, @xref{Recursion Tutorial}.

@progstyle I prefer using @code{recursive} to @code{recurse}, because
calling the definition by name is more descriptive (if the name is
well-chosen) than the somewhat cryptic @code{recurse}.  E.g., in a quicksort
implementation, it is much better to read (and think) ``now sort the
partitions'' than to read ``now do a recursive call''.

For mutual recursion, use @code{Defer}red words, like this:

@example
Defer foo

: bar ( ... -- ... )
 ... foo ... ;

:noname ( ... -- ... )
 ... bar ... ;
IS foo
@end example

Deferred words are discussed in more detail in @ref{Deferred Words}.

The current definition returns control to the calling definition when the
end of the definition is reached or @code{EXIT} is encountered.

@findex EXIT ( @var{ compilation -- ; run-time nest-sys --   } ) core
@cindex @code{EXIT}
@kindex EXIT
@format
@code{EXIT} ( @i{compilation -- ; run-time nest-sys --  }) core ``EXIT''
@end format
Return to the calling definition; usually used as a way of forcing an early
return from a definition. Before @code{EXIT}ing you must clean up the return
stack and @code{UNLOOP} any outstanding @code{?DO}...@code{LOOP}s.  Use
@code{;s} for a tickable word that behaves like @code{exit} in the absence
of locals.


@findex ?EXIT ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{?EXIT}
@kindex ?EXIT
@format
@code{?EXIT} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``?EXIT''
@end format
Return to the calling definition if @i{f} is true.


@findex ;s ( @var{ R:w --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{;s}
@kindex ;s
@format
@code{;s} ( @i{R:w -- }) gforth-0.2 ``semis''
@end format
The primitive compiled by @code{EXIT}.



@node Exception Handling, , Calls and returns, Control Structures
@subsection Exception Handling
@cindex exceptions

@c quit is a very bad idea for error handling, 
@c because it does not translate into a THROW
@c it also does not belong into this chapter

If a word detects an error condition that it cannot handle, it can
@code{throw} an exception.  In the simplest case, this will terminate your
program, and report an appropriate error.

@findex throw ( @var{ y1 .. ym nerror -- y1 .. ym / z1 .. zn error   } ) exception
@cindex @code{throw}
@kindex throw
@format
@code{throw} ( @i{y1 .. ym nerror -- y1 .. ym / z1 .. zn error  }) exception ``throw''
@end format
If @i{nerror} is 0, drop it and continue.  Otherwise, transfer control to
the next dynamically enclosing exception handler, reset the stacks
accordingly, and push @i{nerror}.


@findex fast-throw ( @var{ ... wball -- ... wball  } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{fast-throw}
@kindex fast-throw
@format
@code{fast-throw} ( @i{... wball -- ... wball }) gforth-experimental ``fast-throw''
@end format
Lightweight @code{throw} variant: only for non-zero balls, and does not
store a backtrace or deal with missing @code{catch}.


@code{Throw} consumes a cell-sized error number on the stack. There are some
predefined error numbers in Standard Forth (see @file{errors.fs}).  In
Gforth (and most other systems) you can use the iors produced by various
words as error numbers (e.g., a typical use of @code{allocate} is
@code{allocate throw}).  Gforth also provides the word @code{exception} to
define your own error numbers (with decent error reporting); a Standard
Forth version of this word (but without the error messages) is available in
@code{compat/except.fs}.  And finally, you can use your own error numbers
(anything outside the range -4095..0), but won't get nice error messages,
only numbers.  For example, try:

@example
-10 throw                    \ Standard defined
-267 throw                   \ system defined
s" my error" exception throw \ user defined
7 throw                      \ arbitrary number
@end example

@findex exception ( @var{ addr u -- n   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{exception}
@kindex exception
@format
@code{exception} ( @i{addr u -- n  }) gforth-0.2 ``exception''
@end format
@var{n} is a previously unused @code{throw} value in the range
(-4095...-256). Consecutive calls to @code{exception} return consecutive
decreasing numbers. Gforth uses the string @var{addr u} as an error message.



There are also cases where you have a word (typically modeled after POSIX'
@code{strerror}) for converting an error number into a string.  You can use
the following word to get these strings into Gforth's error handling:

@findex exceptions ( @var{ xt n1 -- n2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{exceptions}
@kindex exceptions
@format
@code{exceptions} ( @i{xt n1 -- n2  }) gforth-1.0 ``exceptions''
@end format
@i{Xt} @code{( +n -- c-addr u )} converts an error number in the range
0<=@i{n}<@i{n1} into an error message.  @code{Exceptions} reserves @i{n1}
error codes in the range n2-n1<n3<=n2.  When (at some later point in time)
the Gforth error code @i{n3} in that range is thrown, it pushes @i{n2-n3}
and then executes @i{xt} to produce the error message.



As an example, if the @code{errno} errors (and the conversion using
@code{strerror}) was not already directly supported by Gforth, you could tie
@code{strerror} in as follows:

@example
' strerror 1536 exceptions constant errno-base
: errno-ior ( -- n )
\ n is the Gforth ior corresponding to the value in errno, so
\ we have to convert between the ranges here.
\ ERRNO is not a Gforth word, so you  would have to use the
\ C interface to access it.
  errno errno-base over - swap 0<> and ;
@end example

When you call a C function (with the C interface) and its return value
indictes that an error happened, you can then perform @code{errno-ior throw}
to produce an exception with the proper error message (such as ``Permission
denied'').

A common idiom to @code{THROW} a specific @i{err#} if a flag is true is
this:

@example
@code{( flag ) 0<> @i{err#} and throw}
@end example

Your program can provide exception handlers to catch exceptions.  An
exception handler can be used to correct the problem, or to clean up some
data structures and just throw the exception to the next exception handler.
Note that @code{throw} jumps to the dynamically innermost exception
handler.  The system's exception handler is outermost, and just prints an
error and restarts command-line interpretation (or, in batch mode (i.e.,
while processing the shell command line), leaves Gforth).

The Standard Forth way to catch exceptions is @code{catch}:

@findex catch ( @var{ x1 .. xn xt -- y1 .. ym 0 / z1 .. zn error   } ) exception
@cindex @code{catch}
@kindex catch
@format
@code{catch} ( @i{x1 .. xn xt -- y1 .. ym 0 / z1 .. zn error  }) exception ``catch''
@end format
@code{Executes} @i{xt}.  If execution returns normally, @code{catch} pushes
0 on the stack.  If execution returns through @code{throw}, all the stacks
are reset to the depth on entry to @code{catch}, and the TOS (the @i{xt}
position) is replaced with the throw code.


@findex nothrow ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{nothrow}
@kindex nothrow
@format
@code{nothrow} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``nothrow''
@end format
Use this (or the standard sequence @code{['] false catch 2drop})  after a
@code{catch} or @code{endtry} that does not rethrow; this ensures that the
next @code{throw} will record a backtrace.



The most common use of exception handlers is to clean up the state when an
error happens.  E.g.,

@example
base @@ >r hex \ actually the HEX should be inside foo to protect
              \ against exceptions between HEX and CATCH
['] foo catch ( nerror|0 )
r> base !
( nerror|0 ) throw \ pass it on
@end example

A use of @code{catch} for handling the error @code{myerror} might look like
this:

@example
['] foo catch
CASE
  myerror OF ... ( do something about it ) nothrow ENDOF
  dup throw \ default: pass other errors on, do nothing on non-errors
ENDCASE
@end example

Having to wrap the code into a separate word is often cumbersome, therefore
Gforth provides an alternative syntax:

@example
TRY
  @i{code1}
  IFERROR
    @i{code2}
  THEN
  @i{code3}
ENDTRY
@end example

This performs @i{code1}.  If @i{code1} completes normally, execution
continues with @i{code3}.  If there is an exception in @i{code1} or before
@code{endtry}, the stacks are reset to the depth during @code{try}, the
throw value is pushed on the data stack, and execution continues at
@i{code2}, and finally falls through to @i{code3}.

@findex try ( @var{ compilation  -- orig ; run-time  -- R:sys1   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{try}
@kindex try
@format
@code{try} ( @i{compilation  -- orig ; run-time  -- R:sys1  }) gforth-0.5 ``try''
@end format
Start an exception-catching region.


@findex endtry ( @var{ compilation  -- ; run-time  R:sys1 --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{endtry}
@kindex endtry
@format
@code{endtry} ( @i{compilation  -- ; run-time  R:sys1 --  }) gforth-0.5 ``endtry''
@end format
End an exception-catching region.


@findex iferror ( @var{ compilation  orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time  --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{iferror}
@kindex iferror
@format
@code{iferror} ( @i{compilation  orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time  --  }) gforth-0.7 ``iferror''
@end format
Starts the exception handling code (executed if there is an exception
between @code{try} and @code{endtry}).  This part has to be finished with
@code{then}.



If you don't need @i{code2}, you can write @code{restore} instead of
@code{iferror then}:

@example
TRY
  @i{code1}
RESTORE
  @i{code3}
ENDTRY
@end example

@cindex unwind-protect
The cleanup example from above in this syntax:

@example
base @@ @{ oldbase @}
TRY
  hex foo \ now the hex is placed correctly
  0       \ value for throw
RESTORE
  oldbase base !
ENDTRY
throw
@end example

An additional advantage of this variant is that an exception between
@code{restore} and @code{endtry} (e.g., from the user pressing @kbd{Ctrl-C})
restarts the execution of the code after @code{restore}, so the base will be
restored under all circumstances.

However, you have to ensure that this code does not cause an exception
itself, otherwise the @code{iferror}/@code{restore} code will loop.
Moreover, you should also make sure that the stack contents needed by the
@code{iferror}/@code{restore} code exist everywhere between @code{try} and
@code{endtry}; in our example this is achived by putting the data in a local
before the @code{try} (you cannot use the return stack because the exception
frame (@i{sys1}) is in the way there).

This kind of usage corresponds to Lisp's @code{unwind-protect}.

@cindex @code{recover} (old Gforth versions)
If you do not want this exception-restarting behaviour, you achieve this as
follows:

@example
TRY
  @i{code1}
ENDTRY-IFERROR
  @i{code2}
THEN
@end example

If there is an exception in @i{code1}, then @i{code2} is executed, otherwise
execution continues behind the @code{then} (or in a possible @code{else}
branch).  This corresponds to the construct

@example
TRY
  @i{code1}
RECOVER
  @i{code2}
ENDTRY
@end example

in Gforth before version 0.7.  So you can directly replace
@code{recover}-using code; however, we recommend that you check if it would
not be better to use one of the other @code{try} variants while you are at
it.

To ease the transition, Gforth provides two compatibility files:
@file{endtry-iferror.fs} provides the @code{try ... endtry-iferror ... then}
syntax (but not @code{iferror} or @code{restore}) for old systems;
@file{recover-endtry.fs} provides the @code{try ... recover ... endtry}
syntax on new systems, so you can use that file as a stopgap to run old
programs.  Both files work on any system (they just do nothing if the system
already has the syntax it implements), so you can unconditionally
@code{require} one of these files, even if you use a mix old and new
systems.

@findex restore ( @var{ compilation  orig1 -- ; run-time  --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{restore}
@kindex restore
@format
@code{restore} ( @i{compilation  orig1 -- ; run-time  --  }) gforth-0.7 ``restore''
@end format
Starts restoring code, that is executed if there is an exception, and if
there is no exception.


@findex endtry-iferror ( @var{ compilation  orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time  R:sys1 --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{endtry-iferror}
@kindex endtry-iferror
@format
@code{endtry-iferror} ( @i{compilation  orig1 -- orig2 ; run-time  R:sys1 --  }) gforth-0.7 ``endtry-iferror''
@end format
End an exception-catching region while starting exception-handling code
outside that region (executed if there is an exception between @code{try}
and @code{endtry-iferror}).  This part has to be finished with @code{then}
(or @code{else}...@code{then}).



Here's the error handling example:

@example
TRY
  foo
ENDTRY-IFERROR
  CASE
    myerror OF ... ( do something about it ) nothrow ENDOF
    throw \ pass other errors on
  ENDCASE
THEN
@end example

@progstyle As usual, you should ensure that the stack depth is statically
known at the end: either after the @code{throw} for passing on errors, or
after the @code{ENDTRY} (or, if you use @code{catch}, after the end of the
selection construct for handling the error).

There are two alternatives to @code{throw}: @code{Abort"} is conditional and
you can provide an error message.  @code{Abort} just produces an ``Aborted''
error.

The problem with these words is that exception handlers cannot differentiate
between different @code{abort"}s; they just look like @code{-2 throw} to
them (the error message cannot be accessed by standard programs).  Similar
@code{abort} looks like @code{-1 throw} to exception handlers.

@findex ABORT" ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time f --   } ) core,exception-ext
@cindex @code{ABORT"}
@kindex ABORT"
@format
@code{ABORT"} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time f --  }) core,exception-ext ``abort-quote''
@end format
If any bit of @i{f} is non-zero, perform the function of @code{-2 throw},
displaying the string @i{ccc} if there is no exception frame on the
exception stack.


@findex abort ( @var{ ?? -- ??   } ) core,exception-ext
@cindex @code{abort}
@kindex abort
@format
@code{abort} ( @i{?? -- ??  }) core,exception-ext ``abort''
@end format
@code{-1 throw}.



For problems that are not that awful that you need to abort execution, you
can just display a warning.  The variable @code{warnings} allows to tune how
many warnings you see.

@findex WARNING" ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time f --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{WARNING"}
@kindex WARNING"
@format
@code{WARNING"} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time f --  }) gforth-1.0 ``WARNING"''
@end format
if @i{f} is non-zero, display the string @i{ccc} as warning message.


@findex warnings ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{warnings}
@kindex warnings
@format
@code{warnings} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``warnings''
@end format
set warnings level to
@table @code
@item 0
turns warnings off
@item -1
turns normal warnings on
@item -2
turns beginner warnings on
@item -3
pedantic warnings on
@item -4
turns warnings into errors (including beginner warnings)
@end table



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Defining Words, Interpretation and Compilation Semantics, Control Structures, Words
@section Defining Words
@cindex defining words

Defining words are used to extend Forth by creating new entries in the
dictionary.

@menu
* CREATE::
* Variables::                Variables and user variables
* Constants::
* Values::                   Initialised variables
* Varues::
* Colon Definitions::
* Anonymous Definitions::    名前無しのワード定義
* Quotations::
* Supplying names::          定義ワードの名前を文字列として渡す
* User-defined Defining Words::
* Deferred Words::           前方参照の許容
* Forward::                  自動解決される前方参照
* Aliases::                  
@end menu

@node CREATE, Variables, Defining Words, Defining Words
@subsection @code{CREATE}
@cindex simple defining words
@cindex defining words, simple

Defining words are used to create new entries in the dictionary. The
simplest defining word is @code{CREATE}. @code{CREATE} is used like this:

@example
CREATE new-word1
@end example

@code{CREATE} is a parsing word, i.e., it takes an argument from the input
stream (@code{new-word1} in our example).  It generates a dictionary entry
for @code{new-word1}. When @code{new-word1} is executed, all that it does is
leave an address on the stack. The address represents the value of the data
space pointer (@code{HERE}) at the time that @code{new-word1} was
defined. Therefore, @code{CREATE} is a way of associating a name with the
address of a region of memory.

@findex Create ( @var{ "name" --   } ) core
@cindex @code{Create}
@kindex Create
@format
@code{Create} ( @i{"name" --  }) core ``Create''
@end format


Note that Standard Forth guarantees only for @code{create} that its body is
in dictionary data space (i.e., where @code{here}, @code{allot} etc. work,
@pxref{Dictionary allocation}).  Also, in Standard Forth only @code{create}d
words can be modified with @code{does>} (@pxref{User-defined Defining
Words}).  And in Standard Forth @code{>body} can only be applied to
@code{create}d words.

By extending this example to reserve some memory in data space, we end up
with something like a @i{variable}. Here are two different ways to do it:

@example
CREATE new-word2 1 cells allot  \ reserve 1 cell - initial value undefined
CREATE new-word3 4 ,            \ reserve 1 cell and initialise it (to 4)
@end example

The variable can be examined and modified using @code{@@} (``fetch'') and
@code{!} (``store'') like this:

@example
new-word2 @@ .      \ get address, fetch from it and display
1234 new-word2 !   \ new value, get address, store to it
@end example

@cindex arrays
A similar mechanism can be used to create arrays. For example, an
80-character text input buffer:

@example
CREATE text-buf 80 chars allot

text-buf 0 chars + c@@ \ the 1st character (offset 0)
text-buf 3 chars + c@@ \ the 4th character (offset 3)
@end example

You can build arbitrarily complex data structures by allocating appropriate
areas of memory. For further discussions of this, and to learn about some
Gforth tools that make it easier, @xref{Structures}.


@node Variables, Constants, CREATE, Defining Words
@subsection Variables
@cindex variables

The previous section showed how a sequence of commands could be used to
generate a variable.  As a final refinement, the whole code sequence can be
wrapped up in a defining word (pre-empting the subject of the next section),
making it easier to create new variables:

@example
: myvariableX ( "name" -- a-addr ) CREATE 1 cells allot ;
: myvariable0 ( "name" -- a-addr ) CREATE 0 , ;

myvariableX foo \ variable foo starts off with an unknown value
myvariable0 joe \ whilst joe is initialised to 0

45 3 * foo !   \ set foo to 135
1234 joe !     \ set joe to 1234
3 joe +!       \ increment joe by 3.. to 1237
@end example

Not surprisingly, there is no need to define @code{myvariable}, since Forth
already has a definition @code{Variable}. Standard Forth does not guarantee
that a @code{Variable} is initialised when it is created (i.e., it may
behave like @code{myvariableX}). In contrast, Gforth's @code{Variable}
initialises the variable to 0 (i.e., it behaves exactly like
@code{myvariable0}). Forth also provides @code{2Variable} and
@code{fvariable} for double and floating-point variables, respectively --
they are initialised to 0. and 0e in Gforth. If you use a @code{Variable} to
store a boolean, you can use @code{on} and @code{off} to toggle its state.

@findex Variable ( @var{ "name" --   } ) core
@cindex @code{Variable}
@kindex Variable
@format
@code{Variable} ( @i{"name" --  }) core ``Variable''
@end format
Define @i{name} and reserve a cell starting at @i{addr}.  @i{name} run-time:
@code{( -- addr )}.


@findex AVariable ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{AVariable}
@kindex AVariable
@format
@code{AVariable} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``AVariable''
@end format
Works like @code{variable}, but (when used in cross-compiled code) tells the
cross-compiler that the cell stored in the variable is an address.


@findex 2Variable ( @var{ "name" --   } ) double
@cindex @code{2Variable}
@kindex 2Variable
@format
@code{2Variable} ( @i{"name" --  }) double ``two-variable''
@end format

@findex fvariable ( @var{ "name" --   } ) floating
@cindex @code{fvariable}
@kindex fvariable
@format
@code{fvariable} ( @i{"name" --  }) floating ``f-variable''
@end format


Finally, for buffers of arbitrary length there is

@findex buffer: ( @var{ u "name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{buffer:}
@kindex buffer:
@format
@code{buffer:} ( @i{u "name" --  }) core-ext ``buffer-colon''
@end format
Define @i{name} and reserve @i{u} bytes starting at @i{addr}.  @i{name}
run-time: @code{( -- addr )}.  Gforth initializes the reserved bytes to 0,
but the standard does not guarantee this.



@comment TODO is that stuff about user variables strictly correct? Is it
@comment just terminal tasks that have user variables?
@comment should document tasker.fs (with some examples) elsewhere
@comment in this manual, then expand on user space and user variables.

@node Constants, Values, Variables, Defining Words
@subsection Constants
@cindex constants

@code{Constant} allows you to declare a fixed value and refer to it by
name. For example:

@example
12 Constant INCHES-PER-FOOT
3E+08 fconstant SPEED-O-LIGHT
@end example

A @code{Variable} can be both read and written, so its run-time behaviour is
to supply an address through which its current value can be manipulated. In
contrast, the value of a @code{Constant} cannot be changed once it has been
declared@footnote{Well, often it can be -- but not in a Standard, portable
way. It's safer to use a @code{Value} (read on).} so it's not necessary to
supply the address -- it is more efficient to return the value of the
constant directly. That's exactly what happens; the run-time effect of a
constant is to put its value on the top of the stack (You can find one way
of implementing @code{Constant} in @ref{User-defined Defining Words}).

Forth also provides @code{2Constant} and @code{fconstant} for defining
double and floating-point constants, respectively.

@findex Constant ( @var{ w "name" --   } ) core
@cindex @code{Constant}
@kindex Constant
@format
@code{Constant} ( @i{w "name" --  }) core ``Constant''
@end format
Define a constant @i{name} with value @i{w}.
 
@i{name} execution: @i{-- w}


@findex AConstant ( @var{ addr "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{AConstant}
@kindex AConstant
@format
@code{AConstant} ( @i{addr "name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``AConstant''
@end format
Like @code{constant}, but defines a constant for an address (this only makes
a difference in the cross-compiler).


@findex 2Constant ( @var{ w1 w2 "name" --   } ) double
@cindex @code{2Constant}
@kindex 2Constant
@format
@code{2Constant} ( @i{w1 w2 "name" --  }) double ``two-constant''
@end format

@findex fconstant ( @var{ r "name" --   } ) floating
@cindex @code{fconstant}
@kindex fconstant
@format
@code{fconstant} ( @i{r "name" --  }) floating ``f-constant''
@end format


@c that's too deep, and it's not necessarily true for all ANS Forths. - anton
@c nac-> How could that not be true in an ANS Forth? You can't define a
@c constant, use it and then delete the definition of the constant..

@c anton->An ANS Forth system can compile a constant to a literal; On
@c decompilation you would see only the number, just as if it had been used
@c in the first place.  The word will stay, of course, but it will only be
@c used by the text interpreter (no run-time duties, except when it is 
@c POSTPONEd or somesuch).

@c nac:
@c I agree that it's rather deep, but IMO it is an important difference
@c relative to other programming languages.. often it's annoying: it
@c certainly changes my programming style relative to C.

@c anton: In what way?

Constants in Forth behave differently from their equivalents in other
programming languages. In other languages, a constant (such as an EQU in
assembler or a #define in C) only exists at compile-time; in the executable
program the constant has been translated into an absolute number and, unless
you are using a symbolic debugger, it's impossible to know what abstract
thing that number represents. In Forth a constant has an entry in the header
space and remains there after the code that uses it has been defined. In
fact, it must remain in the dictionary since it has run-time duties to
perform. For example:

@example
12 Constant INCHES-PER-FOOT
: FEET-TO-INCHES ( n1 -- n2 ) INCHES-PER-FOOT * ;
@end example

@cindex in-lining of constants
When @code{FEET-TO-INCHES} is executed, it will in turn execute the xt
associated with the constant @code{INCHES-PER-FOOT}. If you use @code{see}
to decompile the definition of @code{FEET-TO-INCHES}, you can see that it
makes a call to @code{INCHES-PER-FOOT}. Some Forth compilers attempt to
optimise constants by in-lining them where they are used. You can force
Gforth to in-line a constant like this:

@example
: FEET-TO-INCHES ( n1 -- n2 ) [ INCHES-PER-FOOT ] LITERAL * ;
@end example

If you use @code{see} to decompile @i{this} version of
@code{FEET-TO-INCHES}, you can see that @code{INCHES-PER-FOOT} is no longer
present. To understand how this works, read @ref{Interpret/Compile states},
and @ref{Literals}.

In-lining constants in this way might improve execution time fractionally,
and can ensure that a constant is now only referenced at
compile-time. However, the definition of the constant still remains in the
dictionary. Some Forth compilers provide a mechanism for controlling a
second dictionary for holding transient words such that this second
dictionary can be deleted later in order to recover memory space. However,
there is no standard way of doing this.


@node Values, Varues, Constants, Defining Words
@subsection Values
@cindex values

A @code{Value} behaves like a @code{Constant}, but it can be changed.
@code{TO} is a parsing word that changes a @code{Values}.  In Gforth (not in
Standard Forth) you can access (and change) a @code{value} also with
@code{>body}.

Here are some examples:

@example
12 Value APPLES     \ Define APPLES with an initial value of 12
34 TO APPLES        \ Change the value of APPLES. TO is a parsing word
1 ' APPLES >body +! \ Increment APPLES.  Non-standard usage.
APPLES              \ puts 35 on the top of the stack.
@end example

@findex Value ( @var{ w "name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{Value}
@kindex Value
@format
@code{Value} ( @i{w "name" --  }) core-ext ``Value''
@end format
Define @i{name} with the initial value @i{w}; this value can be changed with
@code{to @i{name}} or @code{->@i{name}}.
 
@i{name} execution: @i{-- w2}


@findex AValue ( @var{ w "name" --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{AValue}
@kindex AValue
@format
@code{AValue} ( @i{w "name" --  }) gforth-0.6 ``AValue''
@end format
Like @code{value}, but defines a value for an address (this only makes a
difference in the cross-compiler).


@findex 2Value ( @var{ d "name" --   } ) double-ext
@cindex @code{2Value}
@kindex 2Value
@format
@code{2Value} ( @i{d "name" --  }) double-ext ``two-value''
@end format

@findex fvalue ( @var{ r "name" --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fvalue}
@kindex fvalue
@format
@code{fvalue} ( @i{r "name" --  }) floating-ext ``f-value''
@end format
Define @i{name} @code{( -- r1 )} where @i{r1} initially is @i{r}; this value
can be changed with @code{to @i{name}} or @code{->@i{name}}.


@findex TO ( @var{ value "name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{TO}
@kindex TO
@format
@code{TO} ( @i{value "name" --  }) core-ext ``TO''
@end format
changes the value of @var{name} to @var{value}


@findex +TO ( @var{ value "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{+TO}
@kindex +TO
@format
@code{+TO} ( @i{value "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``+TO''
@end format
increments the value of @var{name} by @var{value}



@node Varues, Colon Definitions, Values, Defining Words
@subsection Varues
@cindex varues

Sometimes you want to take the address of a value-like word.  Because this
has some disadvantages, Gforth asks you to be explicit about it, and use
@code{varue} (named that way because it combines characteristics of a
variable and a value) to declare the name.

@findex Varue ( @var{ w "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{Varue}
@kindex Varue
@format
@code{Varue} ( @i{w "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``Varue''
@end format
Like @code{value}, but you can also use @code{addr @i{name}}; in the future,
varues may be less efficient than values.


@findex 2varue ( @var{ x1 x2 "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{2varue}
@kindex 2varue
@format
@code{2varue} ( @i{x1 x2 "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``2varue''
@end format
Like @code{2value}, but you can also use @code{addr @i{name}}; in the
future, 2varues may be less efficient than 2values.


@findex fvarue ( @var{ r "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fvarue}
@kindex fvarue
@format
@code{fvarue} ( @i{r "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``fvarue''
@end format
Like @code{fvalue}, but you can also use @code{addr @i{name}}; in the
future, fvarues may be less efficient than fvalues.


@findex addr ( @var{ "name" -- addr   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{addr}
@kindex addr
@format
@code{addr} ( @i{"name" -- addr  }) gforth-1.0 ``addr''
@end format
provides the address @var{addr} of the varue, 2varue, or fvarue @var{name}
or a local @i{name} defined with one of @code{wa: ca: da: fa: xta:}.



@node Colon Definitions, Anonymous Definitions, Varues, Defining Words
@subsection Colon Definitions
@cindex colon definitions

@example
: name ( ... -- ... )
    word1 word2 word3 ;
@end example

@noindent
Creates a word called @code{name} that, upon execution, executes @code{word1
word2 word3}. @code{name} is a @dfn{(colon) definition}.

The explanation above is somewhat superficial. For simple examples of colon
definitions see @ref{Your first definition}.  For an in-depth discussion of
some of the issues involved, @xref{Interpretation and Compilation
Semantics}.

@findex : ( @var{ "name" -- colon-sys   } ) core
@cindex @code{:}
@format
@code{:} ( @i{"name" -- colon-sys  }) core ``colon''
@end format

@findex ; ( @var{ compilation colon-sys -- ; run-time nest-sys --   } ) core
@cindex @code{;}
@kindex ;
@format
@code{;} ( @i{compilation colon-sys -- ; run-time nest-sys --  }) core ``semicolon''
@end format


We plan to to perform automatic inlining eventually, but for now you can
perform inlining with

@findex inline: ( @var{ "name" -- inline:-sys   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{inline:}
@kindex inline:
@format
@code{inline:} ( @i{"name" -- inline:-sys  }) gforth-experimental ``inline-colon''
@end format
Start inline colon definition.  The code between @code{inline:} and
@code{;inline} has to compile (not perform) the code to be inlined, but the
resulting definition @i{name} is a colon definition that performs the
inlined code.  Note that the compiling code must have the stack effect
@code{( -- )}, otherwise you will get an error when Gforth tries to create
the colon definition for @i{name}.


@findex ;inline ( @var{ inline:-sys --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{;inline}
@kindex ;inline
@format
@code{;inline} ( @i{inline:-sys --  }) gforth-experimental ``semi-inline''
@end format
end inline definition started with @code{inline:}



As an example, you can define an inlined word and use it with

@example
inline: my2dup ( a b -- a b a b )
    ]] over over [[ ;inline

#1. my2dup d. d.
: foo my2dup ;
#1. foo d. d.
see foo
@end example

Inline words are related to macros (@pxref{Macros}); the difference is that
a macro has immediate compilation semantics while an @code{inline:}-defined
word has default compilation semantics; this means that you normally use a
macro only inside a colon definition, while you can use an @code{inline:}
word also interpretively.  But that also means that you can do some things
with macros that you cannot do as an @code{inline:} word.  E.g.,

@example
\ Doesn't work:
\   inline: endif ]] then [[ ;inline
\ Instead, write a macro:
: endif ]] then [[ ; immediate
@end example

Conversely, for words that would be fine as non-immediate colon definitions,
define them as non-immediate colon definitions or (if utmost performance is
required) as @code{inline:} words; don't define them as macros, because then
you cannot properly use them interpretively:

@example
: another2dup ]] over over [[ ; immediate
\ Doesn't work:
\   #1. another2dup d. d.
@end example

You may wonder why you have to write compiling code between @code{inline:}
and @code{;inline}.  That's because the implementation of an inline word
like @code{my2dup} above works similar to:

@example
: compile-my2dup ( xt -- )
    drop ]] over over [[ ;

: my2dup [ 0 compile-my2dup ] ;
' compile-my2dup set-optimizer
@end example

The @code{DROP} and @code{0} are there because @code{compile-my2dup} is the
implementation of @code{compile,} for @code{my2dup}, and @code{compile,}
expects an xt (@pxref{User-defined compile-comma}).

@node Anonymous Definitions, Quotations, Colon Definitions, Defining Words
@subsection Anonymous Definitions
@cindex colon definitions
@cindex defining words without name

Sometimes you want to define an @dfn{anonymous word}; a word without a
name. You can do this with:

@findex :noname ( @var{ -- xt colon-sys   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{:noname}
@format
@code{:noname} ( @i{-- xt colon-sys  }) core-ext ``colon-no-name''
@end format


This leaves the execution token for the word on the stack after the closing
@code{;}. Here's an example in which a deferred word is initialised with an
@code{xt} from an anonymous colon definition:

@example
Defer deferred
:noname ( ... -- ... )
  ... ;
IS deferred
@end example

@noindent
Gforth provides an alternative way of doing this, using two separate words:

@findex noname ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{noname}
@kindex noname
@format
@code{noname} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``noname''
@end format
The next defined word will be anonymous. The defining word will leave the
input stream alone. The xt of the defined word will be given by
@code{latestxt}.


@cindex execution token of last defined word
@findex latestxt ( @var{ -- xt   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{latestxt}
@kindex latestxt
@format
@code{latestxt} ( @i{-- xt  }) gforth-0.6 ``latestxt''
@end format
@i{xt} is the execution token of the last word defined.



@noindent
The previous example can be rewritten using @code{noname} and
@code{latestxt}:

@example
Defer deferred
noname : ( ... -- ... )
  ... ;
latestxt IS deferred
@end example

@noindent
@code{noname} works with any defining word, not just @code{:}.

@code{latestxt} also works when the last word was not defined as
@code{noname}.  It does not work for combined words, though.  It also has
the useful property that is is valid as soon as the header for a definition
has been built. Thus:

@example
latestxt . : foo [ latestxt . ] ; ' foo .
@end example

@noindent
prints 3 numbers; the last two are the same.


@node Quotations, Supplying names, Anonymous Definitions, Defining Words
@subsection Quotations
@cindex quotations
@cindex nested colon definitions
@cindex colon definitions, nesting

A quotation is an anonymous colon definition inside another colon
definition.  Quotations are useful when dealing with words that consume an
execution token, like @code{catch} or @code{outfile-execute}.  E.g. consider
the following example of using @code{outfile-execute} (@pxref{Redirection}):

@example
: some-warning ( n -- )
    cr ." warning# " . ;

: print-some-warning ( n -- )
    ['] some-warning stderr outfile-execute ;
@end example

Here we defined @code{some-warning} as a helper word whose xt we could pass
to outfile-execute.  Instead, we can use a quotation to define such a word
anonymously inside @code{print-some-warning}:

@example
: print-some-warning ( n -- )
  [: cr ." warning# " . ;] stderr outfile-execute ;
@end example

The quotation is bouded by @code{[:} and @code{;]}.  It produces an
execution token at run-time.

@findex [: ( @var{ compile-time: -- quotation-sys flag colon-sys   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{[:}
@kindex [:
@format
@code{[:} ( @i{compile-time: -- quotation-sys flag colon-sys  }) gforth-1.0 ``bracket-colon''
@end format
Starts a quotation


@findex ;] ( @var{ compile-time: quotation-sys -- ; run-time: -- xt   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{;]}
@kindex ;]
@format
@code{;]} ( @i{compile-time: quotation-sys -- ; run-time: -- xt  }) gforth-1.0 ``semi-bracket''
@end format
ends a quotation




@node Supplying names, User-defined Defining Words, Quotations, Defining Words
@subsection Supplying the name of a defined word
@cindex names for defined words
@cindex defining words, name given in a string

By default, a defining word takes the name for the defined word from the
input stream. Sometimes you want to supply the name from a string. You can
do this with:

@findex nextname ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{nextname}
@kindex nextname
@format
@code{nextname} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``nextname''
@end format
The next defined word will have the name @var{c-addr u}; the defining word
will leave the input stream alone.



For example:

@example
s" foo" nextname create
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
create foo
@end example

@noindent
@code{nextname} works with any defining word.


@node User-defined Defining Words, Deferred Words, Supplying names, Defining Words
@subsection User-defined Defining Words
@cindex user-defined defining words
@cindex defining words, user-defined
@cindex defining defining words

You can define new defining words in terms of any existing defining word,
but @code{:} and @code{create}...@code{does>}/@code{set-does>} are
particularly flexible, whereas the children of, e.g., @code{constant} are
all just constants.

@menu
* User-defined defining words with colon definitions::
* User-defined defining words using CREATE::
* CREATE..DOES> applications::
* CREATE..DOES> details::
* Advanced does> usage example::
* User-defined TO and DEFER@@::
* User-defined compile-comma::
* Creating from a prototype::
* Making a word current::
* Const-does>::              
@end menu

@node User-defined defining words with colon definitions, User-defined defining words using CREATE, User-defined Defining Words, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection User-defined defining words with colon definitions

You can create a new defining word by wrapping defining-time code around an
existing defining word and putting the sequence in a colon definition. 

@c anton: This example is very complex and leads in a quite different
@c direction from the CREATE-DOES> stuff that follows.  It should probably
@c be done elsewhere, or as a subsubsection of this subsection (or as a
@c subsection of Defining Words)

For example, suppose that you have a word @code{stats} that gathers
statistics about colon definitions given the @i{xt} of the definition, and
you want every colon definition in your application to make a call to
@code{stats}. You can define and use a new version of @code{:} like this:

@example
: stats
  ( xt -- ) DUP ." (Gathering statistics for " . ." )"
  ... ;  \ other code

: my: : latestxt postpone literal ['] stats compile, ;

my: foo + - ;
@end example

When @code{foo} is defined using @code{my:} these steps occur:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{my:} is executed.
@item
The @code{:} within the definition (the one between @code{my:} and
@code{latestxt}) is executed, and does just what it always does; it parses
the input stream for a name, builds a dictionary header for the name
@code{foo} and switches @code{state} from interpret to compile.
@item
The word @code{latestxt} is executed. It puts the @i{xt} for the word that
is being defined -- @code{foo} -- onto the stack.
@item
The code that was produced by @code{postpone literal} is executed; this
causes the value on the stack to be compiled as a literal in the code area
of @code{foo}.
@item
The code @code{['] stats} compiles a literal into the definition of
@code{my:}. When @code{compile,} is executed, that literal -- the execution
token for @code{stats} -- is layed down in the code area of @code{foo} ,
following the literal@footnote{Strictly speaking, the mechanism that
@code{compile,} uses to convert an @i{xt} into something in the code area is
implementation-dependent. A threaded implementation might spit out the
execution token directly whilst another implementation might spit out a
native code sequence.}.
@item
At this point, the execution of @code{my:} is complete, and control returns
to the text interpreter. The text interpreter is in compile state, so
subsequent text @code{+ -} is compiled into the definition of @code{foo} and
the @code{;} terminates the definition as always.
@end itemize

You can use @code{see} to decompile a word that was defined using @code{my:}
and see how it is different from a normal @code{:} definition. For example:

@example
: bar + - ;  \ like foo but using : rather than my:
see bar
: bar
  + - ;
see foo
: foo
  `foo stats + - ;
@end example

@code{`foo} is another way of writing @code{['] foo}.



@node User-defined defining words using CREATE, CREATE..DOES> applications, User-defined defining words with colon definitions, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection User-defined defining words using create
@cindex @code{CREATE} ... @code{DOES>}

If you want the words defined with your defining words to behave differently
from words defined with standard defining words, you can write your defining
word like this:

@example
: def-word ( "name" -- )
    CREATE @i{code1}
DOES> ( ... -- ... )
    @i{code2} ;

def-word name
@end example

@cindex child words
This fragment defines a @dfn{defining word} @code{def-word} and then
executes it.  When @code{def-word} executes, it @code{CREATE}s a new word
@code{name}, and executes the code @i{code1}. The code @i{code2} is not
executed at this time. The word @code{name} is sometimes called a
@dfn{child} of @code{def-word}.

When you execute @code{name}, the address of the body of @code{name} is put
on the data stack and @i{code2} is executed (the address of the body of
@code{name} is the address @code{HERE} returns immediately after the
@code{CREATE}, i.e., the address a @code{create}d word returns by default).

You can use @code{def-word} to define a set of child words that behave
similarly; they all have a common run-time behaviour determined by
@i{code2}. Typically, the @i{code1} sequence builds a data area in the body
of the child word. The structure of the data is common to all children of
@code{def-word}, but the data values are specific -- and private -- to each
child word. When a child word is executed, the address of its private data
area is passed as a parameter on TOS to be used and manipulated@footnote{It
is legitimate both to read and write to this data area.} by @i{code2}.

The two fragments of code that make up the defining words act (are executed)
at two completely separate times:

@itemize @bullet
@item
At @i{define time}, the defining word executes @i{code1} to generate a child
word
@item
At @i{child execution time}, when a child word is invoked, @i{code2} is
executed, using parameters (data) that are private and specific to the child
word.
@end itemize

Another way of understanding the behaviour of @code{def-word} and
@code{name} is to say that, if you make the following definitions:
@example
: def-word1 ( "name" -- )
    CREATE @i{code1} ;

: action1 ( ... -- ... )
    @i{code2} ;

def-word1 name1
@end example

@noindent
Then using @code{name1 action1} is equivalent to using @code{name}.

@cindex @code{CREATE} ... @code{SET-DOES>}
Another way of writing @code{def-word} is (@pxref{Quotations}):

@example
: def-word ( "name" -- ; name execution: ... -- ... )
    create @i{code1}
    [: @i{code2} ;] set-does> ;
@end example

Gforth actually compiles the code using @code{does>} into code equivalent to
the latter code.  An advantage of the @code{set-does>} approach is that you
can put other code behind it and you can use it inside control structures
without needing workarounds.  A disadvantage is that it is Gforth-specific.

A classic example is that you can define @code{CONSTANT} in this way:

@example
: CONSTANT ( w "name" -- )
    CREATE ,
DOES> ( -- w )
    @@ ;
@end example

@noindent
or equivalently

@example
: CONSTANT ( w "name" -- ; name execution: -- w )
    create ,
    ['] @@ set-does> ;
@end example

@comment There is a beautiful description of how this works and what
@comment it does in the Forthwrite 100th edition.. as well as an elegant
@comment commentary on the Counting Fruits problem.

When you create a constant with @code{5 CONSTANT five}, a set of define-time
actions take place; first a new word @code{five} is created, then the value
5 is laid down in the body of @code{five} with @code{,}. When @code{five} is
executed, the address of the body is put on the stack, and @code{@@}
retrieves the value 5. The word @code{five} has no code of its own; it
simply contains a data field and the xt of the quotation or of @code{@@}.

The final example in this section is intended to remind you that space
reserved in @code{CREATE}d words is @i{data} space and therefore can be both
read and written by a Standard program@footnote{Exercise: use this example
as a starting point for your own implementation of @code{Value} and
@code{TO} -- if you get stuck, investigate the behaviour of @code{'} and
@code{[']}.}:

@example
: foo ( "name" -- )
    CREATE -1 ,
DOES> ( -- )
    @@ . ;

foo first-word
foo second-word

123 ' first-word >BODY !
@end example

If @code{first-word} had been a @code{CREATE}d word, we could simply have
executed it to get the address of its data field. However, since it was
defined to have @code{DOES>} actions, its execution semantics are to perform
those @code{DOES>} actions. To get the address of its data field it's
necessary to use @code{'} to get its xt, then @code{>BODY} to translate the
xt into the address of the data field.  When you execute @code{first-word},
it will display @code{123}. When you execute @code{second-word} it will
display @code{-1}.

@cindex stack effect of @code{DOES>}-parts
@cindex @code{DOES>}-parts, stack effect
In the examples above the stack comment after the @code{DOES>} specifies the
stack effect of the defined words, not the stack effect of the following
code (the following code expects the address of the body on the top of
stack, which is not reflected in the stack comment). This is the convention
that I use and recommend (it clashes a bit with using locals declarations
for stack effect specification, though).


@node CREATE..DOES> applications, CREATE..DOES> details, User-defined defining words using CREATE, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection Applications of @code{CREATE..DOES>}
@cindex @code{CREATE} ... @code{DOES>}, applications

You may wonder how to use this feature. Here are some usage patterns:

@cindex factoring similar colon definitions
When you see a sequence of code occurring several times, and you can
identify a meaning, you will factor it out as a colon definition. When you
see similar colon definitions, you can factor them using
@code{CREATE..DOES>}. E.g., an assembler usually defines several words that
look very similar:
@example
: ori, ( reg-target reg-source n -- )
    0 asm-reg-reg-imm ;
: andi, ( reg-target reg-source n -- )
    1 asm-reg-reg-imm ;
@end example

@noindent
This could be factored with:
@example
: reg-reg-imm ( op-code -- )
    CREATE ,
DOES> ( reg-target reg-source n -- )
    @@ asm-reg-reg-imm ;

0 reg-reg-imm ori,
1 reg-reg-imm andi,
@end example

@cindex currying
Another view of @code{CREATE..DOES>} is to consider it as a crude way to
supply a part of the parameters for a word (known as @dfn{currying} in the
functional language community). E.g., @code{+} needs two
parameters. Creating versions of @code{+} with one parameter fixed can be
done like this:

@example
: curry+ ( n1 "name" -- )
    CREATE ,
DOES> ( n2 -- n1+n2 )
    @@ + ;

 3 curry+ 3+
-2 curry+ 2-
@end example


@node CREATE..DOES> details, Advanced does> usage example, CREATE..DOES> applications, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection The gory details of @code{CREATE..DOES>}
@cindex @code{CREATE} ... @code{DOES>}, details

@findex DOES> ( @var{ compilation colon-sys1 -- colon-sys2   } ) core
@cindex @code{DOES>}
@kindex DOES>
@format
@code{DOES>} ( @i{compilation colon-sys1 -- colon-sys2  }) core ``does''
@end format


@cindex @code{DOES>} in a separate definition
This means that you need not use @code{CREATE} and @code{DOES>} in the same
definition; you can put the @code{DOES>}-part in a separate definition. This
allows us to, e.g., select among different @code{DOES>}-parts:
@example
: does1 
DOES> ( ... -- ... )
    code1 ;

: does2
DOES> ( ... -- ... )
    code2 ;

: def-word ( ... -- ... )
    create ...
    IF
       does1
    ELSE
       does2
    ENDIF ;
@end example

In this example, the selection of whether to use @code{does1} or
@code{does2} is made at definition-time; at the time that the child word is
@code{CREATE}d.

Note that the property of @code{does>} to end the definition makes it
necessary to introduce extra definitions @code{does1} and @code{does2}.  You
can avoid that with @code{set-does>}:

@example
: def-word ( ... -- ... )
    create ...
    IF
       [: code1 ;] set-does>
    ELSE
       [: code2 ;] set-does>
    ENDIF ;
@end example

@cindex @code{DOES>} in interpretation state
In a standard program you can apply a @code{DOES>}-part only if the last
word was defined with @code{CREATE}. In Gforth, the @code{DOES>}-part will
override the behaviour of the last word defined in any case. In a standard
program, you can use @code{DOES>} only in a colon definition. In Gforth, you
can also use it in interpretation state, in a kind of one-shot mode; for
example:
@example
CREATE name ( ... -- ... )
  @i{initialization}
DOES>
  @i{code} ;
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to the standard:
@example
:noname
DOES>
    @i{code} ;
CREATE name EXECUTE ( ... -- ... )
    @i{initialization}
@end example

Gforth also supports quotations in interpreted code, and quotations save and
restore the current definition, so you can also write the example above also
as:

@example
CREATE name ( ... -- ... )
  @i{initialization}
[: @i{code} ;] set-does>
@end example

@findex set-does> ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-does>}
@kindex set-does>
@format
@code{set-does>} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-does>''
@end format
Changes the current word such that it pushes its body address and then
executes @i{xt}.  Also changes the @code{compile,} implementation
accordingly.  Call @code{set-optimizer} afterwards if you want a more
efficient implementation.


@findex >body ( @var{ xt -- a_addr   } ) core
@cindex @code{>body}
@kindex >body
@format
@code{>body} ( @i{xt -- a_addr  }) core ``to-body''
@end format
Get the address of the body of the word represented by @i{xt} (the address
of the word's data field).



@node Advanced does> usage example, User-defined TO and DEFER@@, CREATE..DOES> details, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection Advanced does> usage example

The MIPS disassembler (@file{arch/mips/disasm.fs}) contains many words for
disassembling instructions, that follow a very repetetive scheme:

@example
:noname @var{disasm-operands} s" @var{inst-name}" type ;
@var{entry-num} cells @var{table} + !
@end example

Of course, this inspires the idea to factor out the commonalities to allow a
definition like

@example
@var{disasm-operands} @var{entry-num} @var{table} define-inst @var{inst-name}
@end example

The parameters @var{disasm-operands} and @var{table} are usually
correlated.  Moreover, before I wrote the disassembler, there already
existed code that defines instructions like this:

@example
@var{entry-num} @var{inst-format} @var{inst-name}
@end example

This code comes from the assembler and resides in @file{arch/mips/insts.fs}.

So I had to define the @var{inst-format} words that performed the scheme
above when executed.  At first I chose to use run-time code-generation:

@example
: @var{inst-format} ( entry-num "name" -- ; compiled code: addr w -- )
  :noname Postpone @var{disasm-operands}
  name Postpone sliteral Postpone type Postpone ;
  swap cells @var{table} + ! ;
@end example

Note that this supplies the other two parameters of the scheme above.

An alternative would have been to write this using
@code{create}/@code{does>}:

@example
: @var{inst-format} ( entry-num "name" -- )
  here name string, ( entry-num c-addr ) \ parse and save "name"
  noname create , ( entry-num )
  latestxt swap cells @var{table} + !
does> ( addr w -- )
  \ disassemble instruction w at addr
  @@ >r 
  @var{disasm-operands}
  r> count type ;
@end example

Somehow the first solution is simpler, mainly because it's simpler to shift
a string from definition-time to use-time with @code{sliteral} than with
@code{string,} and friends.

I wrote a lot of words following this scheme and soon thought about
factoring out the commonalities among them.  Note that this uses a two-level
defining word, i.e., a word that defines ordinary defining words.

This time a solution involving @code{postpone} and friends seemed more
difficult (try it as an exercise), so I decided to use a
@code{create}/@code{does>} word; since I was already at it, I also used
@code{create}/@code{does>} for the lower level (try using @code{postpone}
etc. as an exercise), resulting in the following definition:

@example
: define-format ( disasm-xt table-xt -- )
    \ define an instruction format that uses disasm-xt for
    \ disassembling and enters the defined instructions into table
    \ table-xt
    create 2,
does> ( u "inst" -- )
    \ defines an anonymous word for disassembling instruction inst,
    \ and enters it as u-th entry into table-xt
    2@@ swap here name string, ( u table-xt disasm-xt c-addr ) \ remember string
    noname create 2,      \ define anonymous word
    execute latestxt swap ! \ enter xt of defined word into table-xt
does> ( addr w -- )
    \ disassemble instruction w at addr
    2@@ >r ( addr w disasm-xt R: c-addr )
    execute ( R: c-addr ) \ disassemble operands
    r> count type ; \ print name 
@end example

Note that the tables here (in contrast to above) do the @code{cells +} by
themselves (that's why you have to pass an xt).  This word is used in the
following way:

@example
' @var{disasm-operands} ' @var{table} define-format @var{inst-format}
@end example

As shown above, the defined instruction format is then used like this:

@example
@var{entry-num} @var{inst-format} @var{inst-name}
@end example

In terms of currying, this kind of two-level defining word provides the
parameters in three stages: first @var{disasm-operands} and @var{table},
then @var{entry-num} and @var{inst-name}, finally @code{addr w}, i.e., the
instruction to be disassembled.  

Of course this did not quite fit all the instruction format names used in
@file{insts.fs}, so I had to define a few wrappers that conditioned the
parameters into the right form.

If you have trouble following this section, don't worry.  First, this is
involved and takes time (and probably some playing around) to understand;
second, this is the first two-level @code{create}/@code{does>} word I have
written in seventeen years of Forth; and if I did not have @file{insts.fs}
to start with, I may well have elected to use just a one-level defining word
(with some repeating of parameters when using the defining word). So it is
not necessary to understand this, but it may improve your understanding of
Forth.



@node User-defined TO and DEFER@@, User-defined compile-comma, Advanced does> usage example, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection User-defined @code{to} and @code{defer@@}

Gforth's values have several operators: @code{to} (to which @code{is} is an
alias, and @code{defer!} takes an xt instead of a name in the input stream),
@code{+to}, @code{addr}, and @code{action-of} (where @code{defer@@} takes an
xt instead of a name in the input stream).

Gforth allows you to change the @code{(to)} action of a word.

@findex (to) ( @var{ val operation xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{(to)}
@kindex (to)
@format
@code{(to)} ( @i{val operation xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``paren-to''
@end format
@i{xt} is of a value like word @i{name}.  Stores @i{val} @code{to}
@i{name}.  @i{operation} selects between @code{to}, @code{+to}, @code{addr},
and @code{action-of}.


@findex to-table: ( @var{ "name" "xt1" .. "xtn" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{to-table:}
@kindex to-table:
@format
@code{to-table:} ( @i{"name" "xt1" .. "xtn" --  }) gforth-experimental ``to-table-colon''
@end format
create a table with entries for @code{TO}, @code{+TO}, @code{ADDR}, and
@code{ACTION-OF}.  Use @code{n/a} to mark unsupported operations.


@findex to-method: ( @var{ xt table "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{to-method:}
@kindex to-method:
@format
@code{to-method:} ( @i{xt table "name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``to-method-colon''
@end format
create a to-method, where @var{xt} computes the address to access the field,
and @var{table} contains the operators to store to it.


@findex set-to ( @var{ to-xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-to}
@kindex set-to
@format
@code{set-to} ( @i{to-xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-to''
@end format
Sets the implementation of the @code{(to) ( val xt -- )} method of the
current word to @i{to-xt}.


@findex n/a ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{n/a}
@kindex n/a
@format
@code{n/a} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``not-available''
@end format
this word can be ticked, but throws an ``Operation not supported'' exception
on interpretation and compilation.  Use this for methods and alike that
aren't supported.



@code{(to)} is a word used inside @code{to}: it stores the value at
run-time.  The general stack effect of @code{(to)} method is @code{( val
operation xt -- )}, where @i{xt} identifies the word stored into,
@i{operation} the actual variant of @code{to}-like operations, and @i{val}
is the value (of appropriate type) stored there.

You shall implement the @code{to}-method using @code{to-table:} to create a
type-specific table of operations (not specified slots at the end of the
table are filled up with @code{n/a}), and using @code{to-method:} together
with the operation to get from the @i{xt} of the value to its data field
(usually @code{>body} for values in the dictionary, but value-style data can
also reside in structures or user areas).

E.g., one can implement @code{fvalue} as follows:

@example
to-table: f!-table f! f+!
' >body f!-table to-method: fvalue-to

: fvalue ( r "name" -- ; name: -- r )
  create f,
  ['] f@@ set-does>
  ['] fvalue-to set-to ;

5e fvalue foo
: bar foo 1e f+ to foo ;
see bar
@end example

@node User-defined compile-comma, Creating from a prototype, User-defined TO and DEFER@@, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection User-defined @code{compile,}

You can also change the implementation of @code{compile,} for a word, with

@findex set-optimizer ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-optimizer}
@kindex set-optimizer
@format
@code{set-optimizer} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-optimizer''
@end format
Changes the current word such that @code{compile,}ing it executes @i{xt}
(with the same stack contents as passed to @code{compile,}).  Note that
@code{compile,} must be consistent with @code{execute}, so you must use
@code{set-optimizer} only to install a more efficient implementation of the
same behaviour.


@findex opt: ( @var{ compilation -- colon-sys2 ; run-time -- nest-sys   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{opt:}
@kindex opt:
@format
@code{opt:} ( @i{compilation -- colon-sys2 ; run-time -- nest-sys  }) gforth-1.0 ``opt:''
@end format
Starts a nameless colon definition; when it is complete, this colon
definition will become the @code{compile,} implementation of the latest word
(before the @code{opt:}).



Note that the resulting @code{compile,} must still be equivalent to
@code{postpone literal postpone execute}, so @code{set-optimizer} is useful
for efficiency, not for changing the behaviour.  There is nothing that
prevents you from shooting yourself in the foot, however.  You can check
whether your uses of @code{set-optimizer} are correct by comparing the
results when you use it with the results you get when you disable your uses
by first defining

@example
: set-optimizer drop ;
@end example

As an example of the use of @code{set-optimizer}, we can enhance one of the
definitions of @code{CONSTANT} above as follows.

@example
: CONSTANT ( n "name" -- ; name: -- n )
  create ,
  ['] @@ set-does>
  [: >body @@ postpone literal ;] set-optimizer
;
@end example

The only change is the addition of the @code{set-optimizer} line.  When you
define a constant and compile it:

@example
5 constant five
: foo five ;
@end example

the compiled @code{five} in @code{foo} is now compiled to the literal 5
instead of a generic invocation of @code{five}.  The quotation has the same
stack effect as @code{compile,}: @code{( xt -- )}.  The passed xt belongs to
the @code{compile,}d word, i.e., @code{five} in the example.  In the example
the xt is first converted to the body address, then the value 5 at that
place is fetched, and that value is compiled with the @code{postpone
literal} (@pxref{Literals}).

This use of @code{set-optimizer} assumes that the user does not change the
value of a constant with, e.g., @code{6 ' five >body !}.  While @code{five}
has been defined with @code{create}, that is an implementation detail of
@code{CONSTANT}, and if you don't document it, the user must not rely on
it.  And if you use @code{set-optimizer} in a way that assumes that the body
does not change (like is done here), you must not document that
@code{create} is used; and conversely, if you document it, you have to write
the @code{compile,} implementation such that it can deal with changing
bodies.

Another example is a better-optimized variant of the @code{fvalue} example
above:

@example
: compile-fvalue-to ( xt-value-to -- )
  drop ]] >body f! [[ ;
  
: fvalue-to ( r xt -- )
  >body f! ;
' compile-fvalue-to set-optimizer

: fvalue ( r "name" -- ; name: -- r )
  create f,
  ['] f@@ set-does>
  [: >body ]] literal f@@ [[ ;] set-optimizer
  ['] fvalue-to set-to ;

5e fvalue foo
: bar foo 1e f+ to foo ;
see bar
@end example

Compare the code for @code{bar} with the one for the earlier definition.
Here we see the optimization of both the code for reading the fvalue (coming
from the @code{set-optimizer} in @code{fvalue}) and for writing the fvalue
(coming from the @code{set-optimizer} applied to @code{fvalue-to}.  Because
an fvalue can change (unlike a constant), the reading part (inside
@code{fvalue}) compiles the address and a @code{f@@} that is performed at
run-time.

@c !! reference the appropriate sections that explain these
@c optimizations
For @code{fvalue-to}, the @code{compile,} implementation basically just
compiles the code executed by @code{fvalue} inline.  The compilation
semantics of @code{to} compiles the address as literal and then the
@code{(to)} implementation (i.e., @code{fvalue-to}).  In this process the
@code{>body} is optimized away.

In practice Gforth's @code{fvalue} includes a few additional twists, e.g.,
to support @code{+TO}.

Note that the call to @code{set-optimizer} has to be performed after the
call to @code{set-does>} (or @code{does>}, because @code{set-does>}
overwrites the @code{compile,} implementation itself.

As we can see in the @code{fvalue-to} example, we can also apply
@code{set-optimizer} to individual words rather than inside a defining word
like @code{constant} or @code{fvalue}.  In this case, the xt of the word
passed to optimizer is usually unnecessary and is @code{drop}ped, as in
@code{compile-fvalue-to}.

The engine @code{gforth-itc} uses @code{,} for @code{compile,} and
@code{set-optimizer} has no effect there.


@node Creating from a prototype, Making a word current, User-defined compile-comma, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection Creating from a prototype

In the above we show how to define a word by first using @code{create}, and
then modifying it with @code{set-does>}, @code{set-to}, @code{set-optimizer}
etc.

An alternative way is to create a prototype using these words, and then
create a new word from that prototype.  This kind of copying does not cover
the body, so that has to be allocated and initialized explicitly.  Taking
@code{fvalue} above, we could instead define it as:

@example
create fvalue-prototype ( -- r )
['] f@@ set-does>
[: >body ]] literal f@@ [[ ;] set-optimizer
['] fvalue-to set-to

: fvalue ( r "name" -- ; name: -- r )
  ``fvalue-prototype create-from f, reveal ;
@end example

An advantage of this approach is that creating @code{fvalue} words is now
faster, because it does not need to first duplicate the header methods of
@code{create}, modify them, and eventually deduplicate them.  But this
advantage is only relevant if the number of words created with this defining
word is huge.

@findex create-from ( @var{ nt "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{create-from}
@kindex create-from
@format
@code{create-from} ( @i{nt "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``create-from''
@end format
Create a word @i{name} that behaves like @i{nt}, but with an empty body.
@i{nt} must be the nt of a named word.  The resulting header is not yet
revealed.  Creating a word with @code{create-from} without using any
@code{set-} words is faster than if you create a word using @code{set-}
words, @code{immediate}, or @code{does>}.  You can use @code{noname} with
@code{create-from}.


@findex reveal ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{reveal}
@kindex reveal
@format
@code{reveal} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``reveal''
@end format
Put the current word in the wordlist current at the time of the header
definition.



The performance advantage does not extend to using @code{noname} with the
defining word.  Therefore we also have

@findex noname-from ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{noname-from}
@kindex noname-from
@format
@code{noname-from} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``noname-from''
@end format
Create a nameless word that behaves like @i{xt}, but with an empty body.
@i{xt} must be the nt of a nameless word.



Here's a usage example:

@example
``fvalue-prototype noname create-from
latestnt constant noname-fvalue-prototype

: noname-fvalue ( r -- xt ; xt execution: -- r )
  noname-fvalue-prototype noname-from f,
  latestxt ;
@end example


@node Making a word current, Const-does>, Creating from a prototype, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection Making a word current
@cindex Modifying a word defined earlier

Many words mentioned above, such as @code{immediate} or @code{set-optimizer}
change the ``current'' or ``most recently defined'' word.  Sometimes you
want to change an earlier word.  You can do this with

@findex make-latest ( @var{ nt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{make-latest}
@kindex make-latest
@format
@code{make-latest} ( @i{nt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``make-latest''
@end format
Make @i{nt} the latest definition, which can be manipulated by
@code{immediate} and @code{set-*} operations.  If you have used (especially
compiled) the word referred to by nt already, do not change the behaviour of
the word (only its implementation), otherwise you may get a surprising mix
of behaviours that is not consistent between Gforth engines and versions.




@node Const-does>, , Making a word current, User-defined Defining Words
@subsubsection @code{Const-does>}

A frequent use of @code{create}...@code{does>} is for transferring some
values from definition-time to run-time.  Gforth supports this use with

@findex const-does> ( @var{ run-time: w*uw r*ur uw ur "name" --   } ) gforth-obsolete
@cindex @code{const-does>}
@kindex const-does>
@format
@code{const-does>} ( @i{run-time: w*uw r*ur uw ur "name" --  }) gforth-obsolete ``const-does''
@end format
Defines @var{name} and returns.
 
@var{name} execution: pushes @var{w*uw r*ur}, then performs the code
following the @code{const-does>}.



A typical use of this word is:

@example
: curry+ ( n1 "name" -- )
1 0 CONST-DOES> ( n2 -- n1+n2 )
    + ;

3 curry+ 3+
@end example

Here the @code{1 0} means that 1 cell and 0 floats are transferred from
definition to run-time.

The advantages of using @code{const-does>} are:

@itemize

@item
You don't have to deal with storing and retrieving the values, i.e., your
program becomes more writable and readable.

@item
When using @code{does>}, you have to introduce a @code{@@} that cannot be
optimized away (because you could change the data using
@code{>body}...@code{!}); @code{const-does>} avoids this problem.

@end itemize

A Standard Forth implementation of @code{const-does>} is available in
@file{compat/const-does.fs}.


@node Deferred Words, Forward, User-defined Defining Words, Defining Words
@subsection Deferred Words
@cindex deferred words

The defining word @code{Defer} allows you to define a word by name without
defining its behaviour; the definition of its behaviour is deferred. Here
are two situation where this can be useful:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Where you want to allow the behaviour of a word to be altered later, and for
all precompiled references to the word to change when its behaviour is
changed.
@item
For mutual recursion; @xref{Calls and returns}.
@end itemize

In the following example, @code{foo} always invokes the version of
@code{greet} that prints ``@code{Good morning}'' whilst @code{bar} always
invokes the version that prints ``@code{Hello}''. There is no way of getting
@code{foo} to use the later version without re-ordering the source code and
recompiling it.

@example
: greet ." Good morning" ;
: foo ... greet ... ;
: greet ." Hello" ;
: bar ... greet ... ;
@end example

This problem can be solved by defining @code{greet} as a @code{Defer}red
word. The behaviour of a @code{Defer}red word can be defined and redefined
at any time by using @code{IS} to associate the xt of a previously-defined
word with it. The previous example becomes:

@example
Defer greet ( -- )
: foo ... greet ... ;
: bar ... greet ... ;
: greet1 ( -- ) ." Good morning" ;
: greet2 ( -- ) ." Hello" ;
' greet2 IS greet  \ make greet behave like greet2
@end example

@progstyle You should write a stack comment for every deferred word, and put
only XTs into deferred words that conform to this stack effect.  Otherwise
it's too difficult to use the deferred word.

A deferred word can be used to improve the statistics-gathering example from
@ref{User-defined Defining Words}; rather than edit the application's source
code to change every @code{:} to a @code{my:}, do this:

@example
: real: : ;     \ retain access to the original
defer :         \ redefine as a deferred word
' my: IS :      \ use special version of :
\
\ load application here
\
' real: IS :    \ go back to the original
@end example


One thing to note is that @code{IS} has special compilation semantics, such
that it parses the name at compile time (like @code{TO}):

@example
: set-greet ( xt -- )
  IS greet ;

' greet1 set-greet
@end example

In situations where @code{IS} does not fit, use @code{defer!} instead.

A deferred word can only inherit execution semantics from the xt (because
that is all that an xt can represent -- for more discussion of this
@pxref{Tokens for Words}); by default it will have default interpretation
and compilation semantics deriving from this execution semantics.  However,
you can change the interpretation and compilation semantics of the deferred
word in the usual ways:

@example
: bar .... ; immediate
Defer fred immediate
Defer jim

' bar IS jim  \ jim has default semantics
' bar IS fred \ fred is immediate
@end example

@findex Defer ( @var{ "name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{Defer}
@kindex Defer
@format
@code{Defer} ( @i{"name" --  }) core-ext ``Defer''
@end format
Define a deferred word @i{name}; its execution semantics can be set with
@code{defer!} or @code{is} (and they have to, before first executing
@i{name}.


@findex defer! ( @var{ xt xt-deferred --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{defer!}
@kindex defer!
@format
@code{defer!} ( @i{xt xt-deferred --  }) core-ext ``defer-store''
@end format
Changes the @code{defer}red word @var{xt-deferred} to execute @var{xt}.


@findex IS ( @var{ value "name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{IS}
@kindex IS
@format
@code{IS} ( @i{value "name" --  }) core-ext ``IS''
@end format
changes the @code{defer}red word @var{name} to execute @var{value}


@findex defer@@ ( @var{ xt-deferred -- xt   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{defer@@}
@kindex defer@@
@format
@code{defer@@} ( @i{xt-deferred -- xt  }) core-ext ``new-defer-fetch''
@end format
@i{xt} represents the word currently associated with the deferred word
@i{xt-deferred}.


@findex action-of ( @var{ interpretation "name" -- xt; compilation "name" -- ; run-time -- xt   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{action-of}
@kindex action-of
@format
@code{action-of} ( @i{interpretation "name" -- xt; compilation "name" -- ; run-time -- xt  }) core-ext ``action-of''
@end format
@i{Xt} is the XT that is currently assigned to @i{name}.



@c Use @code{words-deferred} to see a list of deferred words.

Definitions of these Forth-2012 words in Forth-94 are provided in
@file{compat/defer.fs}.  In addition, Gforth provides:

@findex defers ( @var{ compilation "name" -- ; run-time ... -- ...   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{defers}
@kindex defers
@format
@code{defers} ( @i{compilation "name" -- ; run-time ... -- ...  }) gforth-0.2 ``defers''
@end format
Compiles the present contents of the deferred word @i{name} into the current
definition.  I.e., this produces static binding as if @i{name} was not
deferred.


@findex wrap-xt ( @var{ xt1 xt2 xt: xt3 -- ...   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wrap-xt}
@kindex wrap-xt
@format
@code{wrap-xt} ( @i{xt1 xt2 xt: xt3 -- ...  }) gforth-1.0 ``wrap-xt''
@end format
Set deferred word xt2 to xt1 and execute xt3.  Restore afterwards.


@findex preserve ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{preserve}
@kindex preserve
@format
@code{preserve} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``preserve''
@end format
emit code that reverts a deferred word to the state at compilation




@node Forward, Aliases, Deferred Words, Defining Words
@subsection Forward

The defining word @code{Forward} in @code{forward.fs} allows you to create
forward references, which are resolved automatically, and do not incur
additional costs like the indirection of @code{Defer}.  However, these
forward definitions only work for colon definitions.

@findex forward ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{forward}
@kindex forward
@format
@code{forward} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``forward''
@end format
Defines a forward reference to a colon definition.  Defining a colon
definition with the same name in the same wordlist resolves the forward
references.  Use @code{.unresolved} to check whether any forwards are
unresolved.


@findex .unresolved ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{.unresolved}
@kindex .unresolved
@format
@code{.unresolved} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``.unresolved''
@end format
print all unresolved forward references



@node Aliases, , Forward, Defining Words
@subsection Aliases
@cindex aliases
@cindex synonyms

The defining word @code{synonym} allows you to define a word by name that
has the same behaviour as some other word. Here are two situation where this
can be useful:

@itemize @bullet
@item
When you want access to a word's definition from a different word list (for
an example of this, see the definition of the @code{Root} word list in the
Gforth source).
@item
When you want to create a synonym; a definition that can be known by either
of two names (for example, @code{THEN} and @code{ENDIF} are synonyms).
@end itemize

@findex Synonym ( @var{ "name" "oldname" --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{Synonym}
@kindex Synonym
@format
@code{Synonym} ( @i{"name" "oldname" --  }) tools-ext ``Synonym''
@end format
Define @i{name} to behave the same way as @i{oldname}: Same interpretation
semantics, same compilation semantics, same @code{to}/@code{defer!} and
@code{defer@@} semantics.



Gforth also offers the non-standard @code{alias}, that does not inherit the
compilation semantics, @code{to}/@code{defer!} or @code{defer@@} semantics
from its parent.  You can then change, e.g., the compilation semantics with,
e.g., @code{immediate}.

@findex Alias ( @var{ xt "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{Alias}
@kindex Alias
@format
@code{Alias} ( @i{xt "name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``Alias''
@end format
Define @i{name} as a word that performs @i{xt}.  Unlike for deferred words,
aliases don't have an indirection overhead when compiled.



Example:

@example
: foo ... ; immediate

' foo Alias bar1           \ bar1 is not an immediate word
' foo Alias bar2 immediate \ bar2 is an immediate word
synonym bar3 foo           \ bar3 is an immediate word
@end example

Both synonyms and aliases have a different nt than the original, but ticking
it (or using @code{name>interpret}) produces the same xt as the original
(@pxref{Tokens for Words}).

@node Interpretation and Compilation Semantics, Tokens for Words, Defining Words, Words
@section Interpretation and Compilation Semantics
@cindex semantics, interpretation and compilation

@c !! state and ' are used without explanation
@c example for immediate/compile-only? or is the tutorial enough

@cindex interpretation semantics
The @dfn{interpretation semantics} of a (named) word are what the text
interpreter does when it encounters the word in interpret state. It also
appears in some other contexts, e.g., the execution token returned by
@code{' @i{word}} identifies the interpretation semantics of @i{word} (in
other words, @code{' @i{word} execute} is equivalent to interpret-state text
interpretation of @code{@i{word}}).

@cindex compilation semantics
The @dfn{compilation semantics} of a (named) word are what the text
interpreter does when it encounters the word in compile state. It also
appears in other contexts, e.g, @code{POSTPONE @i{word}}
compiles@footnote{In standard terminology, ``appends to the current
definition''.} the compilation semantics of @i{word}.

Most words have default compilation semantics: compile the execution
semantics (stack effect @code{( -- )}).  But a number of words have other
compilation semantics, documented for the individual word (including its
stack effect).

@cindex execution semantics
The standard also talks about @dfn{execution semantics}.  In the standard it
never differs from the interpretation semantics if both are defined, but one
or both of them may not be defined.  Gforth makes no difference between
interpretation and execution semantics, so these terms are used
interchangeably.

In Gforth (since 1.0) all words have defined interpretation/execution
semantics.  For many words that have no defined interpretation nor execution
semantics in the standard (e.g., @code{if}), the interpretation/execution
semantics in Gforth are to perform the compilation semantics.

In the standard, execution semantics are used to define interpretation and
compilation semantics by default: By default, the interpretation semantics
of a word are to @code{execute} its execution semantics, and the compilation
semantics of a word are to @code{compile,} its execution
semantics.@footnote{In standard terminology: The default interpretation
semantics are its execution semantics; the default compilation semantics are
to append its execution semantics to the execution semantics of the current
definition.}

Unnamed words (@pxref{Anonymous Definitions}) cannot be encountered by the
text interpreter, ticked, or @code{postpone}d.  Such a word is represented
by its xt (@pxref{Tokens for Words}), and the behaviour when this xt is
@code{execute}d is called its execution semantics.

@comment TODO expand, make it co-operate with new sections on text interpreter.

@cindex immediate words
@cindex compile-only words
You can change the semantics of the most-recently defined word:


@findex immediate ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{immediate}
@kindex immediate
@format
@code{immediate} ( @i{--  }) core ``immediate''
@end format
Make the compilation semantics of a word be to @code{execute} the execution
semantics.


@findex compile-only ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{compile-only}
@kindex compile-only
@format
@code{compile-only} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``compile-only''
@end format
Mark the last definition as compile-only; as a result, the text interpreter
and @code{'} will warn when they encounter such a word.


@findex restrict ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{restrict}
@kindex restrict
@format
@code{restrict} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``restrict''
@end format
A synonym for @code{compile-only}



By convention, words with non-default compilation semantics (e.g., immediate
words) often have names surrounded with brackets (e.g., @code{[']},
@pxref{Execution token}).

Note that ticking (@code{'}) a compile-only word gives a warning (``<word>
is compile-only'').

@menu
* Combined words::           
@end menu


@node Combined words, , Interpretation and Compilation Semantics, Interpretation and Compilation Semantics
@subsection Combined Words
@cindex combined words

Gforth allows you to define @dfn{combined words} -- words that have an
arbitrary combination of interpretation and compilation semantics.

@findex interpret/compile: ( @var{ interp-xt comp-xt "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{interpret/compile:}
@kindex interpret/compile:
@format
@code{interpret/compile:} ( @i{interp-xt comp-xt "name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``interpret/compile:''
@end format


This feature was introduced for implementing @code{TO} and @code{S"}. I
recommend that you do not define such words, as cute as they may be: they
make it hard to get at both parts of the word in some contexts.  E.g.,
assume you want to get an execution token for the compilation part. Instead,
define two words, one that embodies the interpretation part, and one that
embodies the compilation part.  Once you have done that, you can define a
combined word with @code{interpret/compile:} for the convenience of your
users.

You might try to use this feature to provide an optimizing implementation of
the default compilation semantics of a word. For example, by defining:
@example
:noname
   foo bar ;
:noname
   POSTPONE foo POSTPONE bar ;
interpret/compile: opti-foobar
@end example

@noindent
as an optimizing version of:

@example
: foobar
    foo bar ;
@end example

Unfortunately, this does not work correctly with @code{[compile]}, because
@code{[compile]} assumes that the compilation semantics of all
@code{interpret/compile:} words are non-default. I.e., @code{[compile]
opti-foobar} would compile compilation semantics, whereas @code{[compile]
foobar} would compile interpretation semantics.

@cindex state-smart words (are a bad idea)
@anchor{state-smartness}
Some people try to use @dfn{state-smart} words to emulate the feature
provided by @code{interpret/compile:} (words are state-smart if they check
@code{STATE} during execution). E.g., they would try to code @code{foobar}
like this:

@example
: foobar
  STATE @@
  IF ( compilation state )
    POSTPONE foo POSTPONE bar
  ELSE
    foo bar
  ENDIF ; immediate
@end example

Although this works if @code{foobar} is only processed by the text
interpreter, it does not work in other contexts (like @code{'} or
@code{POSTPONE}). E.g., @code{' foobar} will produce an execution token for
a state-smart word, not for the interpretation semantics of the original
@code{foobar}; when you execute this execution token (directly with
@code{EXECUTE} or indirectly through @code{COMPILE,}) in compile state, the
result will not be what you expected (i.e., it will not perform @code{foo
bar}). State-smart words are a bad idea. Simply don't write
them@footnote{For a more detailed discussion of this topic, see M. Anton
Ertl,
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl98.ps.gz,@code{State}-smartness---Why
it is Evil and How to Exorcise it}}, EuroForth '98.}!

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Tokens for Words, Compiling words, Interpretation and Compilation Semantics, Words
@section Tokens for Words
@cindex tokens for words

This section describes the creation and use of tokens that represent words.

@menu
* Execution token::          実行(execution)/インタプリタ(interpretation) 
                               セマンティクス
* Name token::               名前付きワード
* Compilation token::        コンパイル・セマンティクス
@end menu

@node Execution token, Name token, Tokens for Words, Tokens for Words
@subsection Execution token

@cindex xt
@cindex execution token
An @dfn{execution token} (@emph{xt}) represents some behaviour of a word.
You can use @code{execute} to invoke the behaviour represented by the xt and
@code{compile,} (@pxref{Macros}) to compile it into the current definition.
Other uses include deferred words (@pxref{Deferred Words}).

In particular, there is @emph{the} execution token of a word that represents
its interpretation semantics aka execution semantics.@footnote{The Forth
standard has words with undefined interpretation semantics (e.g.,
@code{r@@}) and words without defined execution semantics (e.g., @code{s"})
and words with neither (e.g., @code{if}), but in cases where both
interpretation and execution semantics are defined, they are the same; so we
treat them as being the same.}

@cindex prefix @code{`}
@cindex @code{`} prefix
For a named word @i{x}, you can use @code{`@i{x}} to get its execution
token:

@example
5 `. ( n xt )
execute ( )      \ execute the xt (i.e., ".")
: foo `. execute ;
5 foo
@end example

@cindex tick (')
However, the @code{`} prefix is a Gforth extension, so you may prefer to use
the standard Forth words:

@findex ' ( @var{ "name" -- xt   } ) core
@cindex @code{'}
@kindex '
@format
@code{'} ( @i{"name" -- xt  }) core ``tick''
@end format
@i{xt} represents @i{name}'s interpretation semantics. Perform @code{-14
throw} if the word has no interpretation semantics.


@findex ['] ( @var{ compilation. "name" -- ; run-time. -- xt   } ) core
@cindex @code{[']}
@kindex [']
@format
@code{[']} ( @i{compilation. "name" -- ; run-time. -- xt  }) core ``bracket-tick''
@end format
@i{xt} represents @i{name}'s interpretation semantics. Perform @code{-14
throw} if the word has no interpretation semantics.



These are parsing words (whereas @code{`@i{x}} is treated as a literal by a
recognizer), and you may find the behaviour in interpreted and compiled code
unintuitive:

@example
5 ' .   ( n xt ) 
execute ( )      \ execute the xt of .
\ does not work as intended:
\ : foo ' . ;
\ 5 foo execute
\ instead:
: foo ['] . ;
5 foo execute    \ execute the xt of .
\ Usage of ' in colon definition:
: bar ' execute ;
5 bar .          \ execute the xt of .
@end example

@code{'} parses at run-time, so if you put it in a colon definition, as in
@code{bar}, it does not consume the next word in the colon definition, but
the next word at run-time (i.e., the @code{.} in the invocation of
@code{bar}).  If you want to put a literal xt in a colon definition without
writing @code{`@i{x}}, write @code{['] @i{x}}.

Gforth's @code{`@i{x}}, @code{'} and @code{[']} warn when you use them on
compile-only words, because such usage may be non-portable between different
Forth systems.

You can avoid that warning as well as the portability problems by defining
an immediate variant of the word, e.g.:

@example
: if postpone if ; immediate
: test [ ' if execute ] ." test" then ;
@end example

The resulting execution token performs the compilation semantics of
@code{if} when @code{execute}d.

Another way to get an xt is @code{:noname} or @code{latestxt}
(@pxref{Anonymous Definitions}).  For anonymous words this gives an xt for
the only behaviour the word has (the execution semantics), but you can also
use it after defining a named word to get its xt.

@example
:noname ." hello" ;
execute
@end example

An xt occupies one cell and can be manipulated like any other cell.

In Standard Forth the xt is just an abstract data type (i.e., defined by the
operations that produce or consume it).  The concrete implementation (since
Gforth 1.0) is the body address (for old hands: PFA) of the word; in Gforth
0.7 and earlier, the xt was implemented as code field addres (CFA, 2 cells
before the PFA).

@findex execute ( @var{ xt --  } ) core
@cindex @code{execute}
@kindex execute
@format
@code{execute} ( @i{xt -- }) core ``execute''
@end format
Perform the semantics represented by the execution token, @i{xt}.

@findex execute-exit ( @var{ compilation -- ; run-time xt nest-sys --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{execute-exit}
@kindex execute-exit
@format
@code{execute-exit} ( @i{compilation -- ; run-time xt nest-sys --  }) gforth-1.0 ``execute-exit''
@end format
Execute @code{xt} and return from the current definition, in a
tail-call-optimized way: The return address @code{nest-sys} and the locals
are deallocated before executing @code{xt}.


@findex perform ( @var{ a-addr --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{perform}
@kindex perform
@format
@code{perform} ( @i{a-addr -- }) gforth-0.2 ``perform''
@end format
@code{@@ execute}.


@code{Noop} is sometimes used to have a placeholder execution token:

@findex noop ( @var{ --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{noop}
@kindex noop
@format
@code{noop} ( @i{-- }) gforth-0.2 ``noop''
@end format



@node Name token, Compilation token, Execution token, Tokens for Words
@subsection Name token

@cindex name token
@cindex nt (name token)
Gforth represents named words by the @dfn{name token}, (@i{nt}).  The name
token is a cell-sized abstract data type that occurs as argument or result
of the words below.

Since Gforth 1.0, for most words the concrete implementation of their nt is
the same address as its xt (this is the primary nt for the xt).  However,
synonyms, aliases, and words defined with @code{interpret/compile:} get
their xt from another word, but still have an nt of their own (that is
different from the xt).  Therefore, you cannot use xts and nts
interchangeably, even if you are prepared to write code specific to Gforth
1.0.  You do not get these alternate nts for the xt with @code{>name}.

You get the nt of a word @i{x} with @code{``@i{x}} (since Gforth 1.0)  or
with

@findex find-name ( @var{ c-addr u -- nt | 0   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{find-name}
@kindex find-name
@format
@code{find-name} ( @i{c-addr u -- nt | 0  }) gforth-0.2 ``find-name''
@end format
Find the name @i{c-addr u} in the current search order. Return its @i{nt},
if found, otherwise 0.


@findex find-name-in ( @var{ c-addr u wid -- nt | 0   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{find-name-in}
@kindex find-name-in
@format
@code{find-name-in} ( @i{c-addr u wid -- nt | 0  }) gforth-1.0 ``find-name-in''
@end format
search the word list identified by @i{wid} for the definition named by the
string at @i{c-addr u}. Return its @i{nt}, if found, otherwise 0.


@findex latest ( @var{ -- nt   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{latest}
@kindex latest
@format
@code{latest} ( @i{-- nt  }) gforth-0.6 ``latest''
@end format
@var{nt} is the name token of the last word defined; it is 0 if the last
word has no name.


@findex latestnt ( @var{ -- nt   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{latestnt}
@kindex latestnt
@format
@code{latestnt} ( @i{-- nt  }) gforth-1.0 ``latestnt''
@end format
@i{nt} is the name token of the last word defined.


@findex >name ( @var{ xt -- nt|0   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>name}
@kindex >name
@format
@code{>name} ( @i{xt -- nt|0  }) gforth-0.2 ``to-name''
@end format
The primary name token @i{nt} of the word represented by @i{xt}.  Returns 0
if @i{xt} is not an xt (using a heuristic check that has a small chance of
misidentifying a non-xt as xt), or if the primary nt is of an unnamed word.
As of Gforth 1.0, every xt has a primary nt, but other named words may have
the same interpretation sematics xt.


@findex xt>name ( @var{ xt -- nt   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xt>name}
@kindex xt>name
@format
@code{xt>name} ( @i{xt -- nt  }) gforth-1.0 ``xt-to-name''
@end format
Produces the primary nt for an xt.  If @i{xt} is not an xt, @i{nt} is not
guaranteed to be an nt.



You can get all the nts in a wordlist with

@findex traverse-wordlist ( @var{ ... xt wid -- ...   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{traverse-wordlist}
@kindex traverse-wordlist
@format
@code{traverse-wordlist} ( @i{... xt wid -- ...  }) tools-ext ``traverse-wordlist''
@end format
perform @i{xt} ( ... nt -- f ... ) once for every word @i{nt} in the
wordlist @i{wid}, until @i{f} is false or the wordlist is exhausted.  @i{xt}
is free to use the stack underneath.



You can use the nt to access the interpretation and compilation semantics of
a word, its name, and the next word in the wordlist:

@findex name>interpret ( @var{ nt -- xt   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{name>interpret}
@kindex name>interpret
@format
@code{name>interpret} ( @i{nt -- xt  }) tools-ext ``name-to-interpret''
@end format
@i{xt} represents the interpretation semantics of the word @i{nt}.


@findex name>compile ( @var{ nt -- w xt   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{name>compile}
@kindex name>compile
@format
@code{name>compile} ( @i{nt -- w xt  }) tools-ext ``name-to-compile''
@end format
@i{w xt} is the compilation token for the word @i{nt}.


@findex name>string ( @var{ nt -- addr u   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{name>string}
@kindex name>string
@format
@code{name>string} ( @i{nt -- addr u  }) tools-ext ``name-to-string''
@end format
@i{addr count} is the name of the word represented by @i{nt}.


@findex id. ( @var{ nt --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{id.}
@kindex id.
@format
@code{id.} ( @i{nt --  }) gforth-0.6 ``i-d-dot''
@end format
Print the name of the word represented by @var{nt}.


@findex .id ( @var{ nt --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{.id}
@kindex .id
@format
@code{.id} ( @i{nt --  }) gforth-0.6 ``dot-i-d''
@end format
F83 name for @code{id.}.


@findex name>link ( @var{ nt1 -- nt2 / 0   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{name>link}
@kindex name>link
@format
@code{name>link} ( @i{nt1 -- nt2 / 0  }) gforth-1.0 ``name-to-link''
@end format
For a word @i{nt1}, returns the previous word @i{nt2} in the same wordlist,
or 0 if there is no previous word.



A nameless word usually has no interpretation nor compilation semantics, no
name, and it's not in a wordlist.  But in Gforth (since 1.0) all words are
equal, so even nameless words have an nt (but they are in no wordlist).  You
can get that nt with @code{latestnt}, and the words above that consume nts
do something reasonable for these nts.

As a usage example, the following code lists all the words in
@code{forth-wordlist} with non-default compilation semantics:

@example
: ndcs-words ( wid -- )
  [: dup name>compile ['] compile, <> if over id. then 2drop true ;]
  swap traverse-wordlist ;

forth-wordlist ndcs-words
@end example

@c which
@c holds for Gforth.  There are a few standard ways for a Forth system to
@c deviate from this assumption (although it's more likely that a system
@c that deviates gets it wrong and is non-standard).
This code assumes that a word has default compilation semantics if the xt
part of its compilation token is the xt of @code{compile,}.


@cindex name field address
@cindex NFA
The closest thing to the nt in older Forth systems is the name field address
(NFA), but there are significant differences: in older Forth systems each
word had a unique NFA, LFA, CFA and PFA (in this order, or LFA, NFA, CFA,
PFA) and there were words for getting from one to the next.  In contrast, in
Gforth several nts can get the same xt from @code{name>interpret} xt; there
is a link field in the structure identified by the name token, but searching
usually uses a hash table external to these structures; the name in Gforth
has a cell-wide count-and-flags field, and the nt is not implemented as the
address of that count field.


@node Compilation token, , Name token, Tokens for Words
@subsection Compilation token

@cindex compilation token
@cindex ct (compilation token)
The compilation semantics of a named word is represented by a
@dfn{compilation token} consisting of two cells: @i{w xt}. The top cell
@i{xt} is an execution token. The compilation semantics represented by the
compilation token can be performed with @code{execute}, which consumes the
whole compilation token, with an additional stack effect determined by the
represented compilation semantics.  

At present, the @i{w} part of a compilation token is an execution token, and
the @i{xt} part represents either @code{execute} or
@code{compile,}@footnote{Depending upon the compilation semantics of the
word. If the word has default compilation semantics, the @i{xt} will
represent @code{compile,}. Otherwise (e.g., for immediate words), the @i{xt}
will represent @code{execute}.}. However, don't rely on that knowledge,
unless necessary; future versions of Gforth may introduce unusual
compilation tokens (e.g., a compilation token that represents the
compilation semantics of a literal).

You get the compilation token of, e.g., @code{if} in a standard way with
@code{name>compile}, e.g., @code{`if name>compile}, but there are also
parsing words to get the compilation token of a word:

@findex [COMP'] ( @var{ compilation "name" -- ; run-time -- w xt   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[COMP']}
@kindex [COMP']
@format
@code{[COMP']} ( @i{compilation "name" -- ; run-time -- w xt  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-comp-tick''
@end format
Compilation token @i{w xt} represents @i{name}'s compilation semantics.


@findex COMP' ( @var{ "name" -- w xt   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{COMP'}
@kindex COMP'
@format
@code{COMP'} ( @i{"name" -- w xt  }) gforth-0.2 ``comp-tick''
@end format
Compilation token @i{w xt} represents @i{name}'s compilation semantics.



You can perform the compilation semantics represented by the compilation
token with @code{execute}.  You can compile the compilation semantics with
@code{postpone,}. I.e., @code{``@i{x} name>compile postpone,} is equivalent
to @code{postpone @i{x}}.

@findex postpone, ( @var{ w xt --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{postpone,}
@kindex postpone,
@format
@code{postpone,} ( @i{w xt --  }) gforth-0.2 ``postpone-comma''
@end format
Compile the compilation semantics represented by the compilation token @i{w
xt}.



@c ----------------------------------------------------------
@node Compiling words, The Text Interpreter, Tokens for Words, Words
@section Compiling words
@cindex compiling words
@cindex macros

In contrast to most other languages, Forth has no strict boundary between
compilation and run-time.  E.g., you can run arbitrary code between defining
words (or for computing data used by defining words like
@code{constant}). Moreover, @code{Immediate} (@pxref{Interpretation and
Compilation Semantics} and @code{[}...@code{]} (see below) allow running
arbitrary code while compiling a colon definition (exception: you must not
allot dictionary space).

@menu
* Literals::                 データ値をコンパイルします
* Macros::                   Compiling words
@end menu

@node Literals, Macros, Compiling words, Compiling words
@subsection Literals
@cindex Literals

The simplest and most frequent example is to compute a literal during
compilation.  E.g., the following definition prints an array of strings, one
string per line:

@example
: .strings ( addr u -- ) \ gforth
    2* cells bounds U+DO
	cr i 2@@ type
    2 cells +LOOP ;  
@end example

With a simple-minded compiler like Gforth's, this computes @code{2 cells} on
every loop iteration.  You can compute this value once and for all at
compile time and compile it into the definition like this:

@example
: .strings ( addr u -- ) \ gforth
    2* cells bounds U+DO
	cr i 2@@ type
    [ 2 cells ] literal +LOOP ;  
@end example

@code{[} switches the text interpreter to interpret state (you will get an
@code{ok} prompt if you type this example interactively and insert a newline
between @code{[} and @code{]}), so it performs the interpretation semantics
of @code{2 cells}; this computes a number.  @code{]} switches the text
interpreter back into compile state.  It then performs @code{Literal}'s
compilation semantics, which are to compile this number into the current
word.  You can decompile the word with @code{see .strings} to see the effect
on the compiled code.

You can also optimize the @code{2* cells} into @code{[ 2 cells ] literal *}
in this way.

@findex [ ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{[}
@kindex [
@format
@code{[} ( @i{--  }) core ``left-bracket''
@end format
Enter interpretation state. Immediate word.


@findex ] ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{]}
@kindex ]
@format
@code{]} ( @i{--  }) core ``right-bracket''
@end format
Enter compilation state.


@findex Literal ( @var{ compilation n -- ; run-time -- n   } ) core
@cindex @code{Literal}
@kindex Literal
@format
@code{Literal} ( @i{compilation n -- ; run-time -- n  }) core ``Literal''
@end format
Compilation semantics: compile the run-time semantics.@* Run-time Semantics:
push @i{n}.@* Interpretation semantics: undefined.


@findex ALiteral ( @var{ compilation addr -- ; run-time -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ALiteral}
@kindex ALiteral
@format
@code{ALiteral} ( @i{compilation addr -- ; run-time -- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``ALiteral''
@end format
Works like @code{literal}, but (when used in cross-compiled code) tells the
cross-compiler that the literal is an address.


@findex ]L ( @var{ compilation: n -- ; run-time: -- n   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{]L}
@kindex ]L
@format
@code{]L} ( @i{compilation: n -- ; run-time: -- n  }) gforth-0.5 ``]L''
@end format
equivalent to @code{] literal}



There are also words for compiling other data types than single cells as
literals:

@findex 2Literal ( @var{ compilation w1 w2 -- ; run-time  -- w1 w2   } ) double
@cindex @code{2Literal}
@kindex 2Literal
@format
@code{2Literal} ( @i{compilation w1 w2 -- ; run-time  -- w1 w2  }) double ``two-literal''
@end format
Compile appropriate code such that, at run-time, @i{w1 w2} are placed on the
stack. Interpretation semantics are undefined.


@findex FLiteral ( @var{ compilation r -- ; run-time -- r   } ) floating
@cindex @code{FLiteral}
@kindex FLiteral
@format
@code{FLiteral} ( @i{compilation r -- ; run-time -- r  }) floating ``f-literal''
@end format
Compile appropriate code such that, at run-time, @i{r} is placed on the
(floating-point) stack. Interpretation semantics are undefined.


@findex SLiteral ( @var{ Compilation c-addr1 u ; run-time -- c-addr2 u   } ) string
@cindex @code{SLiteral}
@kindex SLiteral
@format
@code{SLiteral} ( @i{Compilation c-addr1 u ; run-time -- c-addr2 u  }) string ``SLiteral''
@end format
Compilation: compile the string specified by @i{c-addr1}, @i{u} into the
current definition. Run-time: return @i{c-addr2 u} describing the address
and length of the string.



@cindex colon-sys, passing data across @code{:}
@cindex @code{:}, passing data across
You might be tempted to pass data from outside a colon definition to the
inside on the data stack.  This does not work, because @code{:} puhes a
colon-sys, making stuff below unaccessible.  E.g., this does not work:

@example
5 : foo literal ; \ error: "unstructured"
@end example

Instead, you have to pass the value in some other way, e.g., through a
variable:

@example
variable temp
5 temp !
: foo [ temp @@ ] literal ;
@end example


@node Macros, , Literals, Compiling words
@subsection Macros
@cindex Macros
@cindex compiling compilation semantics

@code{Literal} and friends compile data values into the current definition.
You can also write words that compile other words into the current
definition.  E.g.,

@example
: compile-+ ( -- ) \ compiled code: ( n1 n2 -- n )
  POSTPONE + ;

: foo ( n1 n2 -- n )
  [ compile-+ ] ;
1 2 foo .
@end example

This is equivalent to @code{: foo + ;} (@code{see foo} to check this).  What
happens in this example? @code{Postpone} compiles the compilation semantics
of @code{+} into @code{compile-+}; later the text interpreter executes
@code{compile-+} and thus the compilation semantics of +, which compile (the
execution semantics of) @code{+} into @code{foo}.@footnote{A recent RFI
answer requires that compiling words should only be executed in compile
state, so this example is not guaranteed to work on all standard systems,
but on any decent system it will work.}

@findex postpone ( @var{ "name" --   } ) core
@cindex @code{postpone}
@kindex postpone
@format
@code{postpone} ( @i{"name" --  }) core ``postpone''
@end format
Compiles the compilation semantics of @i{name}.



Compiling words like @code{compile-+} are usually immediate (or similar)  so
you do not have to switch to interpret state to execute them; modifying the
last example accordingly produces:

@example
: [compile-+] ( compilation: --; interpretation: -- )
  \ compiled code: ( n1 n2 -- n )
  POSTPONE + ; immediate

: foo ( n1 n2 -- n )
  [compile-+] ;
1 2 foo .
@end example

You will occassionally find the need to POSTPONE several words; putting
POSTPONE before each such word is cumbersome, so Gforth provides a more
convenient syntax: @code{]] ... [[}.  This allows us to write
@code{[compile-+]} as:

@example
: [compile-+] ( compilation: --; interpretation: -- )
  ]] + [[ ; immediate
@end example

@findex ]] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{]]}
@kindex ]]
@format
@code{]]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.6 ``right-bracket-bracket''
@end format
Switch into postpone state: All words and recognizers are processed as if
they were preceded by @code{postpone}.  Postpone state ends when @code{[[}
is recognized.



The unusual direction of the brackets indicates their function: @code{]]}
switches from compilation to postponing (i.e., compilation of compilation),
just like @code{]} switches from immediate execution (interpretation) to
compilation.  Conversely, @code{[[} switches from postponing to compilation,
ananlogous to @code{[} which switches from compilation to immediate
execution.

The real advantage of @code{]] }...@code{ [[} becomes apparent when there
are many words to POSTPONE.  E.g., the word @code{compile-map-array}
(@pxref{Advanced macros Tutorial}) can be written much shorter as follows:

@example
: compile-map-array ( compilation: xt -- ; run-time: ... addr u -- ... )
\ at run-time, execute xt ( ... x -- ... ) for each element of the
\ array beginning at addr and containing u elements
  @{: xt: xt :@}
  ]] cells over + swap ?do
    i @@ xt 1 cells +loop [[ ;

: sum-array ( addr u -- n )
  0 [ ' + compile-map-array ] ;
@end example

If you then say @code{see sum-array}, it shows the following code:

@example
: sum-array
  #0 over + swap ?do
    i @ + #8 +LOOP
;
@end example

In addition to @code{]]}...@code{[[}, this example shows off some other
features:

@itemize

@item
It uses a defer-flavoured (defined with @code{xt:} local @code{xt};
mentioning the local inside @code{]]}...@code{[[} results in
@code{compile,}ing the xt in the local.

@item
It uses the literal @code{1} inside @code{]]}...@code{[[}.  This results in
@code{postpone}ing the @code{1}, i.e. compiling it when
@code{compile-map-array} is run.

@item
When @code{compile-map-array} is run, @code{1 cells} is compiled and
optimized into @code{#8} by Gforth's constant folding.

@end itemize

Note that parsing words such as @code{s\"} don't parse at postpone time and
therefore not inside @code{]]}...@code{[[}.  Instead of @code{s\"
mystring\n"} you can use the string recognizer and write
@code{"mystring\n"}, which works inside @code{]]}...@code{[[}.  Likewise for
the parsing word @code{[']} and the recognizer notation starting with
@code{`}.

But if you prefer to use @code{s\"} (or have a parsing word that has no
recognizer replacement), you can do it by switching back to compilation:

@example
]] ... [[ s\" mystring\n" ]] 2literal ... [[
@end example

Definitions of @code{]]} and friends in Standard Forth are provided in
@file{compat/macros.fs}.

Immediate compiling words are similar to macros in other languages (in
particular, Lisp).  The important differences to macros in, e.g., C are:

@itemize @bullet

@item
You use the same language for defining and processing macros, not a separate
preprocessing language and processor.

@item
Consequently, the full power of Forth is available in macro definitions.
E.g., you can perform arbitrarily complex computations, or generate
different code conditionally or in a loop (e.g., @pxref{Advanced macros
Tutorial}).  This power is very useful when writing a parser generators or
other code-generating software.

@item
Macros defined using @code{postpone} etc. deal with the language at a higher
level than strings; name binding happens at macro definition time, so you
can avoid the pitfalls of name collisions that can happen in C macros.  Of
course, Forth is a liberal language and also allows to shoot yourself in the
foot with text-interpreted macros like

@example
: [compile-+] s" +" evaluate ; immediate
@end example

Apart from binding the name at macro use time, using @code{evaluate} also
makes your definition @code{state}-smart (@pxref{state-smartness}).
@end itemize

You may want the macro to compile a number into a word.  The word to do it
is @code{literal}, but you have to @code{postpone} it, so its compilation
semantics take effect when the macro is executed, not when it is compiled:

@example
: [compile-5] ( -- ) \ compiled code: ( -- n )
  5 POSTPONE literal ; immediate

: foo [compile-5] ;
foo .
@end example

You may want to pass parameters to a macro, that the macro should compile
into the current definition.  If the parameter is a number, then you can use
@code{postpone literal} (similar for other values).

If you want to pass a word that is to be compiled, the usual way is to pass
an execution token and @code{compile,} it:

@example
: twice1 ( xt -- ) \ compiled code: ... -- ...
  dup compile, compile, ;

: 2+ ( n1 -- n2 )
  [ ' 1+ twice1 ] ;
@end example

@findex compile, ( @var{ xt --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{compile,}
@kindex compile,
@format
@code{compile,} ( @i{xt --  }) core-ext ``compile-comma''
@end format
Append the semantics represented by @i{xt} to the current definition.  When
the resulting code fragment is run, it behaves the same as if @i{xt} is
@code{execute}d.



An alternative available in Gforth, that allows you to pass the compilation
semantics as parameters is to use the compilation token (@pxref{Compilation
token}).  The same example in this technique:

@example
: twice ( ... ct -- ... ) \ compiled code: ... -- ...
  2dup 2>r execute 2r> execute ;

: 2+ ( n1 -- n2 )
  [ comp' 1+ twice ] ;
@end example

In the example above @code{2>r} and @code{2r>} ensure that @code{twice}
works even if the executed compilation semantics has an effect on the data
stack.

You can also define complete definitions with these words; this provides an
alternative to using @code{does>} (@pxref{User-defined Defining Words}).
E.g., instead of

@example
: curry+ ( n1 "name" -- )
    CREATE ,
DOES> ( n2 -- n1+n2 )
    @@ + ;
@end example

you could define

@example
: curry+ ( n1 "name" -- )
  \ name execution: ( n2 -- n1+n2 )
  >r : r> POSTPONE literal POSTPONE + POSTPONE ; ;

-3 curry+ 3-
see 3-
@end example

The sequence @code{>r : r>} is necessary, because @code{:} puts a colon-sys
on the data stack that makes everything below it unaccessible.

This way of writing defining words is sometimes more, sometimes less
convenient than using @code{does>} (@pxref{Advanced does> usage example}).
One advantage of this method is that it can be optimized better, because the
compiler knows that the value compiled with @code{literal} is fixed, whereas
the data associated with a @code{create}d word can be changed.

@findex [compile] ( @var{ compilation "name" -- ; run-time ? -- ?   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{[compile]}
@kindex [compile]
@format
@code{[compile]} ( @i{compilation "name" -- ; run-time ? -- ?  }) core-ext ``bracket-compile''
@end format
Legacy word.  Use @code{postpone} instead.  Works like @code{postpone} if
@i{name} has non-default compilation semantics.  If @i{name} has default
compilation semantics (i.e., is a normal word), compiling @code{[compile]
@i{name}} is equivalent to compiling @i{name} (i.e. @code{[compile]} is
redundant in this case.



@c ----------------------------------------------------------
@node The Text Interpreter, The Input Stream, Compiling words, Words
@section The Text Interpreter
@cindex interpreter - outer
@cindex text interpreter
@cindex outer interpreter

@c Should we really describe all these ugly details?  IMO the text
@c interpreter should be much cleaner, but that may not be possible within
@c ANS Forth. - anton
@c nac-> I wanted to explain how it works to show how you can exploit
@c it in your own programs. When I was writing a cross-compiler, figuring out
@c some of these gory details was very helpful to me. None of the textbooks
@c I've seen cover it, and the most modern Forth textbook -- Forth Inc's,
@c seems to positively avoid going into too much detail for some of
@c the internals.

@c anton: ok.  I wonder, though, if this is the right place; for some stuff
@c it is; for the ugly details, I would prefer another place.  I wonder
@c whether we should have a chapter before "Words" that describes some
@c basic concepts referred to in words, and a chapter after "Words" that
@c describes implementation details.

The text interpreter@footnote{This is an expanded version of the material in
@ref{Introducing the Text Interpreter}.} is an endless loop that processes
input from the current input device. It is also called the outer
interpreter, in contrast to the inner interpreter (@pxref{Engine}) which
executes the compiled Forth code on interpretive implementations.

@cindex interpret state
@cindex compile state
The text interpreter operates in one of two states: @dfn{interpret state}
and @dfn{compile state}. The current state is defined by the aptly-named
variable @code{state}.

This section starts by describing how the text interpreter behaves when it
is in interpret state, processing input from the user input device -- the
keyboard. This is the mode that a Forth system is in after it starts up.

@cindex input buffer
@cindex terminal input buffer
The text interpreter works from an area of memory called the @dfn{input
buffer}@footnote{When the text interpreter is processing input from the
keyboard, this area of memory is called the @dfn{terminal input buffer}
(TIB) and is addressed by the (obsolescent) words @code{TIB} and
@code{#TIB}.}, which stores your keyboard input when you press the @key{RET}
key. Starting at the beginning of the input buffer, it skips leading spaces
(called @dfn{delimiters}) then parses a string (a sequence of non-space
characters) until it reaches either a space character or the end of the
buffer. Having parsed a string, it makes two attempts to process it:

@cindex dictionary
@itemize @bullet
@item
It looks for the string in a @dfn{dictionary} of definitions. If the string
is found, the string names a @dfn{definition} (also known as a @dfn{word})
and the dictionary search returns information that allows the text
interpreter to perform the word's @dfn{interpretation semantics}. In most
cases, this simply means that the word will be executed.
@item
If the string is not found in the dictionary, the text interpreter attempts
to treat it as a number, using the rules described in @ref{Number
Conversion}. If the string represents a legal number in the current radix,
the number is pushed onto a parameter stack (the data stack for integers,
the floating-point stack for floating-point numbers).
@end itemize

If both attempts fail, the text interpreter discards the remainder of the
input buffer, issues an error message and waits for more input. If one of
the attempts succeeds, the text interpreter repeats the parsing process
until the whole of the input buffer has been processed, at which point it
prints the status message ``@code{ ok}'' and waits for more input.

@c anton: this should be in the input stream subsection (or below it)

@cindex parse area
The text interpreter keeps track of its position in the input buffer by
updating a variable called @code{>IN} (pronounced ``to-in''). The value of
@code{>IN} starts out as 0, indicating an offset of 0 from the start of the
input buffer. The region from offset @code{>IN @@} to the end of the input
buffer is called the @dfn{parse area}@footnote{In other words, the text
interpreter processes the contents of the input buffer by parsing strings
from the parse area until the parse area is empty.}.  This example shows how
@code{>IN} changes as the text interpreter parses the input buffer:

@example
: remaining source >in @@ /string
  cr ." ->" type ." <-" ; immediate 

1 2 3 remaining + remaining . 

: foo 1 2 3 remaining swap remaining ;
@end example

@noindent
The result is:

@example
->+ remaining .<-
->.<-5  ok

->SWAP remaining ;-<
->;<-  ok
@end example

@cindex parsing words
The value of @code{>IN} can also be modified by a word in the input buffer
that is executed by the text interpreter.  This means that a word can
``trick'' the text interpreter into either skipping a section of the input
buffer@footnote{This is how parsing words work.} or into parsing a section
twice. For example:

@example
: lat ." <<foo>>" ;
: flat ." <<bar>>" >IN DUP @@ 3 - SWAP ! ;
@end example

@noindent
When @code{flat} is executed, this output is produced@footnote{Exercise for
the reader: what would happen if the @code{3} were replaced with @code{4}?}:

@example
<<bar>><<foo>>
@end example

This technique can be used to work around some of the interoperability
problems of parsing words.  Of course, it's better to avoid parsing words
where possible.

@noindent
Two important notes about the behaviour of the text interpreter:

@itemize @bullet
@item
It processes each input string to completion before parsing additional
characters from the input buffer.
@item
It treats the input buffer as a read-only region (and so must your code).
@end itemize

@noindent
When the text interpreter is in compile state, its behaviour changes in
these ways:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If a parsed string is found in the dictionary, the text interpreter will
perform the word's @dfn{compilation semantics}. In most cases, this simply
means that the execution semantics of the word will be appended to the
current definition.
@item
When a number is encountered, it is compiled into the current definition (as
a literal) rather than being pushed onto a parameter stack.
@item
If an error occurs, @code{state} is modified to put the text interpreter
back into interpret state.
@item
Each time a line is entered from the keyboard, Gforth prints ``@code{
compiled}'' rather than `` @code{ok}''.
@end itemize

@cindex text interpreter - input sources
When the text interpreter is using an input device other than the keyboard,
its behaviour changes in these ways:

@itemize @bullet
@item
When the parse area is empty, the text interpreter attempts to refill the
input buffer from the input source. When the input source is exhausted, the
input source is set back to the previous input source.
@item
It doesn't print out ``@code{ ok}'' or ``@code{ compiled}'' messages each
time the parse area is emptied.
@item
If an error occurs, the input source is set back to the user input device.
@end itemize

You can read about this in more detail in @ref{Input Sources}.

@findex >in ( @var{ -- addr   } ) core
@cindex @code{>in}
@kindex >in
@format
@code{>in} ( @i{-- addr  }) core ``to-in''
@end format
@code{uvar} variable -- @i{a-addr} is the address of a cell containing the
char offset from the start of the input buffer to the start of the parse
area.


@findex source ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) core
@cindex @code{source}
@kindex source
@format
@code{source} ( @i{-- addr u  }) core ``source''
@end format
Return address @i{addr} and length @i{u} of the current input buffer



@findex tib ( @var{ -- addr   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{tib}
@kindex tib
@format
@code{tib} ( @i{-- addr  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``t-i-b''
@end format

@findex #tib ( @var{ -- addr   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{#tib}
@kindex #tib
@format
@code{#tib} ( @i{-- addr  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``number-t-i-b''
@end format
@code{uvar} variable -- @i{a-addr} is the address of a cell containing the
number of characters in the terminal input buffer. OBSOLESCENT:
@code{source} superceeds the function of this word.



@findex interpret ( @var{ ... -- ...   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{interpret}
@kindex interpret
@format
@code{interpret} ( @i{... -- ...  }) gforth-0.2 ``interpret''
@end format


@menu
* Input Sources::
* Number Conversion::
* Interpret/Compile states::
* Interpreter Directives::
* Recognizers::
* Text Interpreter Hooks::   
@end menu

@node Input Sources, Number Conversion, The Text Interpreter, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Input Sources
@cindex input sources
@cindex text interpreter - input sources

By default, the text interpreter processes input from the user input device
(the keyboard) when Forth starts up. The text interpreter can process input
from any of these sources:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The user input device -- the keyboard.
@item
A file, using the words described in @ref{Forth source files}.
@item
A block, using the words described in @ref{Blocks}.
@item
A text string, using @code{evaluate}.
@end itemize

A program can identify the current input device from the values of
@code{source-id} and @code{blk}.


@findex source-id ( @var{ -- 0 | -1 | fileid   } ) core-ext,file
@cindex @code{source-id}
@kindex source-id
@format
@code{source-id} ( @i{-- 0 | -1 | fileid  }) core-ext,file ``source-i-d''
@end format
Return 0 (the input source is the user input device), -1 (the input source
is a string being processed by @code{evaluate}) or a @i{fileid} (the input
source is the file specified by @i{fileid}).


@findex blk ( @var{ -- addr   } ) block
@cindex @code{blk}
@kindex blk
@format
@code{blk} ( @i{-- addr  }) block ``b-l-k''
@end format
@code{uvar} variable -- This cell contains the current block number (or 0 if
the current input source is not a block).



@findex save-input ( @var{ -- x1 .. xn n   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{save-input}
@kindex save-input
@format
@code{save-input} ( @i{-- x1 .. xn n  }) core-ext ``save-input''
@end format
The @i{n} entries @i{xn - x1} describe the current state of the input source
specification, in some platform-dependent way that can be used by
@code{restore-input}.


@findex restore-input ( @var{ x1 .. xn n -- flag   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{restore-input}
@kindex restore-input
@format
@code{restore-input} ( @i{x1 .. xn n -- flag  }) core-ext ``restore-input''
@end format
Attempt to restore the input source specification to the state described by
the @i{n} entries @i{xn - x1}. @i{flag} is true if the restore fails.  In
Gforth with the new input code, it fails only with a flag that can be used
to throw again; it is also possible to save and restore between different
active input streams. Note that closing the input streams must happen in the
reverse order as they have been opened, but in between everything is
allowed.



@findex evaluate ( @var{ ... addr u -- ...   } ) core,block
@cindex @code{evaluate}
@kindex evaluate
@format
@code{evaluate} ( @i{... addr u -- ...  }) core,block ``evaluate''
@end format
Save the current input source specification. Store @code{-1} in
@code{source-id} and @code{0} in @code{blk}. Set @code{>IN} to @code{0} and
make the string @i{c-addr u} the input source and input
buffer. Interpret. When the parse area is empty, restore the input source
specification.


@findex query ( @var{ --   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{query}
@kindex query
@format
@code{query} ( @i{--  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``query''
@end format
Make the user input device the input source. Receive input into the Terminal
Input Buffer. Set @code{>IN} to zero. OBSOLESCENT: superceeded by
@code{accept}.





@node Number Conversion, Interpret/Compile states, Input Sources, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Number Conversion
@cindex number conversion

You get an overview of how the text interpreter converts its numeric input
in @ref{Literals in source code}.  This section describes some related
words.

By default, the number base used for integer number conversion is given by
the contents of the variable @code{base}.  Note that a lot of confusion can
result from unexpected values of @code{base}.  If you change @code{base}
anywhere, make sure to save the old value and restore it afterwards; better
yet, use @code{base-execute}, which does this for you.  In general I
recommend keeping @code{base} decimal, and using the prefixes described in
@ref{Literals in source code} for the popular non-decimal bases.

@findex base-execute ( @var{ i*x xt u -- j*x   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{base-execute}
@kindex base-execute
@format
@code{base-execute} ( @i{i*x xt u -- j*x  }) gforth-0.7 ``base-execute''
@end format
execute @i{xt} with the content of @code{BASE} being @i{u}, and restoring
the original @code{BASE} afterwards.


@findex base ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) core
@cindex @code{base}
@kindex base
@format
@code{base} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) core ``base''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- @i{a-addr} is the address of a cell that stores the
number base used by default for number conversion during input and output.
Don't store to @code{base}, use @code{base-execute} instead.


@findex hex ( @var{ --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{hex}
@kindex hex
@format
@code{hex} ( @i{--  }) core-ext ``hex''
@end format
Set @code{base} to &16 (hexadecimal).  Don't use @code{hex}, use
@code{base-execute} instead.


@findex decimal ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{decimal}
@kindex decimal
@format
@code{decimal} ( @i{--  }) core ``decimal''
@end format
Set @code{base} to &10 (decimal).  Don't use @code{decimal}, use
@code{base-execute} instead.


@findex dpl ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dpl}
@kindex dpl
@format
@code{dpl} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``Decimal-PLace''
@end format
@code{User} variable -- @i{a-addr} is the address of a cell that stores the
		 position of the decimal point in the most recent numeric conversion.
Initialised to -1. After the conversion of a number containing no decimal
point, @code{dpl} is -1. After the conversion of @code{2.} it holds 0. After
the conversion of 234123.9 it contains 1, and so forth.



@cindex number conversion - traps for the unwary
@noindent
Number conversion has a number of traps for the unwary:

@itemize @bullet
@item
You cannot determine the current number base using the code sequence
@code{base @@ .} -- the number base is always 10 in the current number
base. Instead, use something like @code{base @@ dec.}
@item
There is a word @code{bin} but it does @i{not} set the number base!
(@pxref{General files}).
@item
Standard Forth requires the @code{.} of a double-precision number to be the
final character in the string.  Gforth allows the @code{.} to be anywhere.
@item
The number conversion process does not check for overflow.
@end itemize

You can read numbers into your programs with the words described in
@ref{Line input and conversion}.

@node Interpret/Compile states, Interpreter Directives, Number Conversion, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Interpret/Compile states
@cindex Interpret/Compile states

A standard program is not permitted to change @code{state}
explicitly. However, it can change @code{state} implicitly, using the words
@code{[} and @code{]}. When @code{[} is executed it switches @code{state} to
interpret state, and therefore the text interpreter starts
interpreting. When @code{]} is executed it switches @code{state} to compile
state and therefore the text interpreter starts compiling. The most common
usage for these words is for switching into interpret state and back from
within a colon definition; this technique can be used to compile a literal
(for an example, @pxref{Literals}) or for conditional compilation (for an
example, @pxref{Interpreter Directives}).


@c This is a bad example: It's non-standard, and it's not necessary.
@c However, I can't think of a good example for switching into compile
@c state when there is no current word (@code{state}-smart words are not a
@c good reason).  So maybe we should use an example for switching into
@c interpret @code{state} in a colon def. - anton
@c nac-> I agree. I started out by putting in the example, then realised
@c that it was non-ANS, so wrote more words around it. I hope this
@c re-written version is acceptable to you. I do want to keep the example
@c as it is helpful for showing what is and what is not portable, particularly
@c where it outlaws a style in common use.

@c anton: it's more important to show what's portable.  After we have done
@c that, we can also show what's not.  In any case, I have written a
@c section Compiling Words which also deals with [ ].

@c  !! The following example does not work in Gforth 0.5.9 or later.

@c  @code{[} and @code{]} also give you the ability to switch into compile
@c  state and back, but we cannot think of any useful Standard application
@c  for this ability. Pre-ANS Forth textbooks have examples like this:

@c  @example
@c  : AA ." this is A" ;
@c  : BB ." this is B" ;
@c  : CC ." this is C" ;

@c  create table ] aa bb cc [

@c  : go ( n -- ) \ n is offset into table.. 0 for 1st entry
@c    cells table + @@ execute ;
@c  @end example

@c  This example builds a jump table; @code{0 go} will display ``@code{this
@c  is A}''. Using @code{[} and @code{]} in this example is equivalent to
@c  defining @code{table} like this:

@c  @example
@c  create table ' aa COMPILE, ' bb COMPILE, ' cc COMPILE,
@c  @end example

@c  The problem with this code is that the definition of @code{table} is not
@c  portable -- it @i{compile}s execution tokens into code space. Whilst it
@c  @i{may} work on systems where code space and data space co-incide, the
@c  Standard only allows data space to be assigned for a @code{CREATE}d
@c  word. In addition, the Standard only allows @code{@@} to access data
@c  space, whilst this example is using it to access code space. The only
@c  portable, Standard way to build this table is to build it in data space,
@c  like this:

@c  @example
@c  create table ' aa , ' bb , ' cc ,
@c  @end example

@c  doc-state


@node Interpreter Directives, Recognizers, Interpret/Compile states, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Interpreter Directives
@cindex interpreter directives
@cindex conditional compilation

These words are usually used in interpret state; typically to control which
parts of a source file are processed by the text interpreter. There are only
a few Standard Forth Standard words, but Gforth supplements these with a
rich set of immediate control structure words to compensate for the fact
that the non-immediate versions can only be used in compile state
(@pxref{Control Structures}). Typical usage:

@example
[undefined] \G [if]
  : \G ... ; immediate
[endif]
@end example

So if the system does not define @code{\G}, compile some replacement code
(with possibly reduced functionality).


@findex [IF] ( @var{ flag --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{[IF]}
@kindex [IF]
@format
@code{[IF]} ( @i{flag --  }) tools-ext ``bracket-if''
@end format
If flag is @code{TRUE} do nothing (and therefore execute subsequent words as
normal). If flag is @code{FALSE}, parse and discard words from the parse
area (refilling it if necessary using @code{REFILL}) including nested
instances of @code{[IF]}..  @code{[ELSE]}.. @code{[THEN]} and
@code{[IF]}.. @code{[THEN]} until the balancing @code{[ELSE]} or
@code{[THEN]} has been parsed and discarded. Immediate word.


@findex [ELSE] ( @var{ --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{[ELSE]}
@kindex [ELSE]
@format
@code{[ELSE]} ( @i{--  }) tools-ext ``bracket-else''
@end format
Parse and discard words from the parse area (refilling it if necessary using
@code{REFILL}) including nested instances of @code{[IF]}..
@code{[ELSE]}.. @code{[THEN]} and @code{[IF]}.. @code{[THEN]} until the
balancing @code{[THEN]} has been parsed and discarded.  @code{[ELSE]} only
gets executed if the balancing @code{[IF]} was @code{TRUE}; if it was
@code{FALSE}, @code{[IF]} would have parsed and discarded the @code{[ELSE]},
leaving the subsequent words to be executed as normal.  Immediate word.


@findex [THEN] ( @var{ --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{[THEN]}
@kindex [THEN]
@format
@code{[THEN]} ( @i{--  }) tools-ext ``bracket-then''
@end format
Do nothing; used as a marker for other words to parse and discard up
to. Immediate word.


@findex [ENDIF] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[ENDIF]}
@kindex [ENDIF]
@format
@code{[ENDIF]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-end-if''
@end format
Do nothing; synonym for @code{[THEN]}



@findex [defined] ( @var{ "<spaces>name" -- flag   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{[defined]}
@kindex [defined]
@format
@code{[defined]} ( @i{"<spaces>name" -- flag  }) tools-ext ``bracket-defined''
@end format
returns true if name is found in current search order


@findex [undefined] ( @var{ "<spaces>name" -- flag   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{[undefined]}
@kindex [undefined]
@format
@code{[undefined]} ( @i{"<spaces>name" -- flag  }) tools-ext ``bracket-undefined''
@end format
returns false if name is found in current search order



@findex [IFDEF] ( @var{ "<spaces>name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[IFDEF]}
@kindex [IFDEF]
@format
@code{[IFDEF]} ( @i{"<spaces>name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-if-def''
@end format
If name is found in the current search-order, behave like @code{[IF]} with a
@code{TRUE} flag, otherwise behave like @code{[IF]} with a @code{FALSE}
flag. Immediate word.


@findex [IFUNDEF] ( @var{ "<spaces>name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[IFUNDEF]}
@kindex [IFUNDEF]
@format
@code{[IFUNDEF]} ( @i{"<spaces>name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-if-un-def''
@end format
If name is not found in the current search-order, behave like @code{[IF]}
with a @code{TRUE} flag, otherwise behave like @code{[IF]} with a
@code{FALSE} flag. Immediate word.



@findex [?DO] ( @var{ n-limit n-index --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[?DO]}
@kindex [?DO]
@format
@code{[?DO]} ( @i{n-limit n-index --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-question-do''
@end format

@findex [DO] ( @var{ n-limit n-index --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[DO]}
@kindex [DO]
@format
@code{[DO]} ( @i{n-limit n-index --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-do''
@end format

@findex [LOOP] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[LOOP]}
@kindex [LOOP]
@format
@code{[LOOP]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-loop''
@end format

@findex [+LOOP] ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[+LOOP]}
@kindex [+LOOP]
@format
@code{[+LOOP]} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-question-plus-loop''
@end format

@findex [FOR] ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[FOR]}
@kindex [FOR]
@format
@code{[FOR]} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-for''
@end format

@findex [NEXT] ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[NEXT]}
@kindex [NEXT]
@format
@code{[NEXT]} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-next''
@end format

@findex [I] ( @var{ run-time -- n   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[I]}
@kindex [I]
@format
@code{[I]} ( @i{run-time -- n  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-i''
@end format
At run-time, @code{[I]} pushes the loop index of the
text-interpretation-time @code{[do]} iteration.  If you want to process the
index at interpretation time, interpret @code{[I]} interpretevely, or use
@code{INT-[I]}.


@findex INT-[I] ( @var{ -- n   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{INT-[I]}
@kindex INT-[I]
@format
@code{INT-[I]} ( @i{-- n  }) gforth-1.0 ``int-bracket-i''
@end format
Push the loop index of the @code{[do]} iteration at text interpretation
time.



@findex [BEGIN] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[BEGIN]}
@kindex [BEGIN]
@format
@code{[BEGIN]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-begin''
@end format

@findex [UNTIL] ( @var{ flag --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[UNTIL]}
@kindex [UNTIL]
@format
@code{[UNTIL]} ( @i{flag --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-until''
@end format

@findex [AGAIN] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[AGAIN]}
@kindex [AGAIN]
@format
@code{[AGAIN]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-again''
@end format

@findex [WHILE] ( @var{ flag --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[WHILE]}
@kindex [WHILE]
@format
@code{[WHILE]} ( @i{flag --  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-while''
@end format

@findex [REPEAT] ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{[REPEAT]}
@kindex [REPEAT]
@format
@code{[REPEAT]} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``bracket-repeat''
@end format


You can use @code{#line} to change Gforth's idea about the current source
line number and source file.  This is useful in cases where the Forth file
is generated from some other source code file, and you want to get,
e.g. error messages etc. that refer to the original source code; then the
Forth-code generator needs to insert @code{#line} lines in the Forth code
wherever appropriate.

@findex #line ( @var{ "u" "["file"]" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{#line}
@kindex #line
@format
@code{#line} ( @i{"u" "["file"]" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``#line''
@end format
Set the line number to @i{u} and (if present) the file name to @i{file}.
Consumes the rest of the line.



@node Recognizers, Text Interpreter Hooks, Interpreter Directives, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Recognizers
@cindex recongizers

When the text interpreter processes source code, it divides the code into
blank-delimited strings, and then calls recognizers to identify them as
words, numbers, etc., until one recognizer identifies (recognizes) the
string; if the string is not recognized, the text interpreter reports an
error (@code{undefined word}).

The usual way to deal with recognizers is to just write code that one of
them identifies (@pxref{Default Recognizers}); however, you can also
manipulate them (@pxref{Dealing with existing Recognizers}) or even define
new ones (@pxref{Defining Recognizers}).

@menu
* Default Recognizers::
* Dealing with existing Recognizers::
* Defining Recognizers::     
@end menu

@node Default Recognizers, Dealing with existing Recognizers, Recognizers, Recognizers
@subsubsection Default Recognizers
@cindex Recognizers normal usage

The standard Forth text interpreter recognizes words in the search order
(@code{rec-nt}), integer numbers (@code{rec-num}), and floating point
numbers (@code{rec-float}).  By default Gforth also recognizes syntaxes for

@itemize @bullet

@item
strings, e.g., @code{"mystring"}, with @code{rec-string}

@item
complex numbers, e.g., @code{0e+1ei}, with @code{rec-complex}

@item
storing a value or changing a defered word, e.g., @code{->myvalue}, with
@code{rec-to}

@item
the xt representing the interpretation semantics of a word, e.g.,
@code{`dup}, with @code{rec-tick}

@item
the nt of a word, e.g., @code{``mysynonym}, with @code{rec-dtick}

@item
an address in the body of a word, e.g., @code{<myarray+8>}, with
@code{rec-body}

@item
an access to an environment variable of the operating system, e.g.,
@code{$@{HOME@}}, with @code{rec-env}

@item
a word in a vocabulary, e.g., @code{myvoc1:myvoc2:myword}, with
@code{rec-scope}

@item
using a specific recognizer to recognize something, e.g., @code{float?1.}, ,
with @code{rec-meta}

@end itemize

You can use @code{locate} (@pxref{Locating source code definitions}) to
determine which recognizer recognizes a piece of source code.  E.g.:

@example
defer mydefer
locate ->mydefer
@end example

will show that @code{rec-to} recognizes @code{->mydefer}.  However, if the
recognizer recognizes a dictionary word (e.g., the scope recognizer), locate
will show that word.

You can see which recognizers are used and the order of recognizers with

@findex .recognizers ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{.recognizers}
@kindex .recognizers
@format
@code{.recognizers} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``dot-recognizers''
@end format
Print the current recognizer order, with the first-searched recognizer
leftmost (unlike .order).  The inverted @code{~} is displayed instead of
@code{rec-}, which is the common prefix of all recognizers.



Recognizers are typically designed to avoid matching the same strings as
other recognizers.  E.g., @code{rec-env} (the environment variable
recognizer) requires braces to avoid a conflict with the number recognizer
for input strings like @code{$ADD}.  There are a few exceptions to this
policy, however:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Word names can be anything, so they can conflict with any other recognizer
(and the search order is searched before other recognizers).

However, they tend not to start with @code{0} (and if they do, they contain
special characters), so if your base is @code{hex}, it is a good practice to
let your numbers start with @code{0}.

In the code bases we have looked at, starting words with @code{'} (quote aka
tick) is much more common than starting them with @code{`} (backquote aka
backtick), so the recognizers for the xt and the nt use @code{`} to reduce
the number of conflicts.

@item
Both the integer recognizer @code{rec-num} and the floating-point recognizer
@code{rec-float} recognize, e.g., @code{1.}.  Because @code{rec-num} is (by
default) first, @code{1.} is recognized as a double-cell integer.  If you
change the recognizer order to use @code{rec-float} first, @code{1.} is
recognized as a floating-point number, but loading code written in standard
Forth may behave in a non-standard way.

In any case, it's a good practice to avoid that conflict in your own code as
follows: Always write double-cell integers with a number prefix, e.g.,
@code{#1.}; and always write floating-point numbers with an @code{e}, e.g.,
@code{1e}.

@item
We have seen a few word names that start with @code{->}.  You can avoid a
conflict by using @code{to myvalue} or @code{to?->myvalue} (the latter works
with @code{postpone}).

@end itemize

@node Dealing with existing Recognizers, Defining Recognizers, Default Recognizers, Recognizers
@subsubsection Dealing with existing Recognizers
@cindex Recognizers, dealing with

A recognizer is a word to which you pass a string.  If the recognizer
recognizes the string, it typically returns some data and the xt of a word
for processing the data; this word is called the translator.  If the
recognizer does not recognize the string, it returns the xt of
@code{notfound}.

All recognizers have the stack effect ( c-addr u -- ... xt ).



Recognizers take a string and return some data and a translator for
interpreting that data.  Gforth implements that translator as xt (executing
it will perform the appropriate action to handle the token in the current
state), but other Forth systems may implement it as actual table, with three
xts inside.  The first xt is the interpretation/run-time xt, it performs the
interpretation semantics on the data (usually, this means it just leaves the
data on the stack).  The second xt performs the compilation semantics, it
gets the data and the run-time semantics xt.  The third xt perfoms the
postpone semantics, it also gets the data and the run-time semantics xt.
You can use @code{>postpone} to postpone the run-time xt.

Recognizers are organized as stack, so you can arrange the sequence of
recognizers in the same way as the vocabulary stack.  Recognizer stacks are
themselves recognizers, i.e. they are executable, take a string and return a
translator.

@findex notfound ( @var{ state --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{notfound}
@kindex notfound
@format
@code{notfound} ( @i{state --  }) gforth-experimental ``notfound''
@end format
If a recognizer fails, it returns @code{notfound}


@findex rec-nt ( @var{ addr u -- nt translate-nt | notfound   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-nt}
@kindex rec-nt
@format
@code{rec-nt} ( @i{addr u -- nt translate-nt | notfound  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-nt''
@end format
recognize a name token


@findex rec-num ( @var{ addr u -- n/d table | notfound   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-num}
@kindex rec-num
@format
@code{rec-num} ( @i{addr u -- n/d table | notfound  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-num''
@end format
converts a number to a single/double integer


@findex rec-float ( @var{ addr u -- r translate-float | notfound   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-float}
@kindex rec-float
@format
@code{rec-float} ( @i{addr u -- r translate-float | notfound  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-float''
@end format
recognize floating point numbers


@findex rec-string ( @var{ addr u -- addr u' r:string | rectype-null   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-string}
@kindex rec-string
@format
@code{rec-string} ( @i{addr u -- addr u' r:string | rectype-null  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-string''
@end format
Convert strings enclosed in double quotes into string literals, escapes are
treated as in @code{S\"}.


@findex rec-to ( @var{ addr u -- xt n r:to | rectype-null   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-to}
@kindex rec-to
@format
@code{rec-to} ( @i{addr u -- xt n r:to | rectype-null  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-to''
@end format
words prefixed with @code{->} are treated as if preceeded by @code{TO}, with
@code{+>} as @code{+TO}, with @code{'>} as @code{ADDR}, with @code{@@>} as
@code{ACTION-OF}, and with @code{=>} as @code{IS}.


@findex rec-tick ( @var{ addr u -- xt rectype-num | rectype-null   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-tick}
@kindex rec-tick
@format
@code{rec-tick} ( @i{addr u -- xt rectype-num | rectype-null  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-tick''
@end format
words prefixed with @code{`} return their xt.  Example: @code{`dup} gives
the xt of dup


@findex rec-dtick ( @var{ addr u -- nt rectype-num | rectype-null   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-dtick}
@kindex rec-dtick
@format
@code{rec-dtick} ( @i{addr u -- nt rectype-num | rectype-null  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-dtick''
@end format
words prefixed with @code{``} return their nt.  Example: @code{``S"} gives
the nt of @code{S"}


@findex rec-body ( @var{ addr u -- xt translate-tick | translate-null   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{rec-body}
@kindex rec-body
@format
@code{rec-body} ( @i{addr u -- xt translate-tick | translate-null  }) gforth-experimental ``rec-body''
@end format
words bracketed with @code{'<'} @code{'>'} return their body.  Example:
@code{<dup>} gives the body of dup


@findex get-recognizers ( @var{ -- xt1 .. xtn n   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{get-recognizers}
@kindex get-recognizers
@format
@code{get-recognizers} ( @i{-- xt1 .. xtn n  }) gforth-experimental ``get-recognizers''
@end format
push the content on the recognizer stack


@findex set-recognizers ( @var{ xt1 .. xtn n --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{set-recognizers}
@kindex set-recognizers
@format
@code{set-recognizers} ( @i{xt1 .. xtn n --  }) gforth-experimental ``set-recognizers''
@end format
set the recognizer stack from content on the stack


@findex recognize ( @var{ addr u rec-addr -- ... rectype   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{recognize}
@kindex recognize
@format
@code{recognize} ( @i{addr u rec-addr -- ... rectype  }) gforth-experimental ``recognize''
@end format
apply a recognizer stack to a string, delivering a token


@findex recognizer-sequence: ( @var{ xt1 .. xtn n "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{recognizer-sequence:}
@kindex recognizer-sequence:
@format
@code{recognizer-sequence:} ( @i{xt1 .. xtn n "name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``recognizer-sequence:''
@end format
concatenate a stack of recognizers to one recognizer with the name
@i{"name"}.  @i{xtn} is tried first, @i{xt1} last, just like on the
recognizer stack


@findex forth-recognize ( @var{ c-addr u -- ... translate-xt   } ) recognizer
@cindex @code{forth-recognize}
@kindex forth-recognize
@format
@code{forth-recognize} ( @i{c-addr u -- ... translate-xt  }) recognizer ``forth-recognize''
@end format
The system recognizer


@findex forth-recognizer ( @var{ -- xt   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{forth-recognizer}
@kindex forth-recognizer
@format
@code{forth-recognizer} ( @i{-- xt  }) gforth-experimental ``forth-recognizer''
@end format
backward compatible to Matthias Trute recognizer API.  This construct turns
a deferred word into a value-like word.


@findex set-forth-recognize ( @var{ xt --   } ) recognizer
@cindex @code{set-forth-recognize}
@kindex set-forth-recognize
@format
@code{set-forth-recognize} ( @i{xt --  }) recognizer ``set-forth-recognize''
@end format
Change the system recognizer


@findex translate: ( @var{ int-xt comp-xt post-xt "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate:}
@kindex translate:
@format
@code{translate:} ( @i{int-xt comp-xt post-xt "name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``translate:''
@end format
create a new recognizer table.  Items are in order of @var{STATE} value,
which are 0 or negative.  Up to 7 slots are available for extensions.


@findex translate-nt ( @var{ i*x nt -- j*x   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate-nt}
@kindex translate-nt
@format
@code{translate-nt} ( @i{i*x nt -- j*x  }) gforth-experimental ``translate-nt''
@end format
translate a name token


@findex translate-num ( @var{ x -- | x   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate-num}
@kindex translate-num
@format
@code{translate-num} ( @i{x -- | x  }) gforth-experimental ``translate-num''
@end format
translate a number


@findex translate-dnum ( @var{ dx -- | dx   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate-dnum}
@kindex translate-dnum
@format
@code{translate-dnum} ( @i{dx -- | dx  }) gforth-experimental ``translate-dnum''
@end format
translate a double number


doc-translate-float
@findex try-recognize ( @var{ addr u xt -- results | false   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{try-recognize}
@kindex try-recognize
@format
@code{try-recognize} ( @i{addr u xt -- results | false  }) gforth-experimental ``try-recognize''
@end format
For nested recognizers: try to recognize @var{addr u}, and execute @var{xt}
to check if the result is desired.  If @var{xt} returns false, clean up all
side effects of the recognizer, and return false.  Otherwise return the
results of the call to @var{xt}, of which the topmost is non-zero.


@findex >interpret ( @var{ translator --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{>interpret}
@kindex >interpret
@format
@code{>interpret} ( @i{translator --  }) gforth-experimental ``>interpret''
@end format
perform interpreter action of translator


@findex >compile ( @var{ translator --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{>compile}
@kindex >compile
@format
@code{>compile} ( @i{translator --  }) gforth-experimental ``>compile''
@end format
perform compile action of translator


@findex >postpone ( @var{ translator --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{>postpone}
@kindex >postpone
@format
@code{>postpone} ( @i{translator --  }) gforth-experimental ``>postpone''
@end format
perform postpone action of translator


@findex translate-method: ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate-method:}
@kindex translate-method:
@format
@code{translate-method:} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``translate-method:''
@end format
create a new translate method, extending the translator table.  You can
assign an xt to an existing rectype by using @var{xt rectype} @code{to}
@var{translator}.


@findex translate-state ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{translate-state}
@kindex translate-state
@format
@code{translate-state} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-experimental ``translate-state''
@end format
change the current state of the system so that executing a translator
matches the translate-method passsed as @var{xt}



@node Defining Recognizers, , Dealing with existing Recognizers, Recognizers
@subsubsection Defining Recognizers



@node Text Interpreter Hooks, , Recognizers, The Text Interpreter
@subsection Text Interpreter Hooks
@cindex hooks in the text interpreter

@findex before-line ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{before-line}
@kindex before-line
@format
@code{before-line} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``before-line''
@end format
Deferred word called before the text interpreter parses the next line


@findex before-word ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{before-word}
@kindex before-word
@format
@code{before-word} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``before-word''
@end format
Deferred word called before the text interpreter parses the next word


@findex line-end-hook ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{line-end-hook}
@kindex line-end-hook
@format
@code{line-end-hook} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``line-end-hook''
@end format
called at every end-of-line when text-interpreting from a file    



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node The Input Stream, Word Lists, The Text Interpreter, Words
@section The Input Stream
@cindex input stream

@c !! integrate this better with the "Text Interpreter" section
The text interpreter reads from the input stream, which can come from
several sources (@pxref{Input Sources}).  Some words, in particular defining
words, but also words like @code{'}, read parameters from the input stream
instead of from the stack.

Such words are called parsing words, because they parse the input stream.
Parsing words are hard to use in other words, because it is hard to pass
program-generated parameters through the input stream.  They also usually
have an unintuitive combination of interpretation and compilation semantics
when implemented naively, leading to various approaches that try to produce
a more intuitive behaviour (@pxref{Combined words}).

It should be obvious by now that parsing words are a bad idea.  If you want
to implement a parsing word for convenience, also provide a factor of the
word that does not parse, but takes the parameters on the stack.  To
implement the parsing word on top if it, you can use the following words:

@findex parse ( @var{ xchar "ccc<xchar>" -- c-addr u   } ) core-ext,xchar-ext
@cindex @code{parse}
@kindex parse
@format
@code{parse} ( @i{xchar "ccc<xchar>" -- c-addr u  }) core-ext,xchar-ext ``parse''
@end format
Parse @i{ccc}, delimited by @i{xchar}, in the parse area. @i{c-addr u}
specifies the parsed string within the parse area. If the parse area was
empty, @i{u} is 0.


@findex string-parse ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 "ccc<string>" -- c-addr2 u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{string-parse}
@kindex string-parse
@format
@code{string-parse} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 "ccc<string>" -- c-addr2 u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``string-parse''
@end format
Parse @i{ccc}, delimited by the string @i{c-addr1 u1}, in the parse
area. @i{c-addr2 u2} specifies the parsed string within the parse area. If
the parse area was empty, @i{u2} is 0.


@findex parse-name ( @var{ "name" -- c-addr u   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{parse-name}
@kindex parse-name
@format
@code{parse-name} ( @i{"name" -- c-addr u  }) core-ext ``parse-name''
@end format
Get the next word from the input buffer


@findex parse-word ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-obsolete
@cindex @code{parse-word}
@kindex parse-word
@format
@code{parse-word} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-obsolete ``parse-word''
@end format
old name for @code{parse-name}; this word has a conflicting behaviour in
some other systems.


@findex name ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-obsolete
@cindex @code{name}
@kindex name
@format
@code{name} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-obsolete ``name''
@end format
old name for @code{parse-name}


@findex word ( @var{ char "<chars>ccc<char>-- c-addr   } ) core
@cindex @code{word}
@kindex word
@format
@code{word} ( @i{char "<chars>ccc<char>-- c-addr  }) core ``word''
@end format
Skip leading delimiters. Parse @i{ccc}, delimited by @i{char}, in the parse
area. @i{c-addr} is the address of a transient region containing the parsed
string in counted-string format. If the parse area was empty or contained no
characters other than delimiters, the resulting string has zero length. A
program may replace characters within the counted string. OBSOLESCENT: the
counted string has a trailing space that is not included in its length.


@findex refill ( @var{ -- flag   } ) core-ext,block-ext,file-ext
@cindex @code{refill}
@kindex refill
@format
@code{refill} ( @i{-- flag  }) core-ext,block-ext,file-ext ``refill''
@end format
Attempt to fill the input buffer from the input source.  When the input
source is the user input device, attempt to receive input into the terminal
input device. If successful, make the result the input buffer, set
@code{>IN} to 0 and return true; otherwise return false. When the input
source is a block, add 1 to the value of @code{BLK} to make the next block
the input source and current input buffer, and set @code{>IN} to 0; return
true if the new value of @code{BLK} is a valid block number, false
otherwise. When the input source is a text file, attempt to read the next
line from the file. If successful, make the result the current input buffer,
set @code{>IN} to 0 and return true; otherwise, return false.  A successful
result includes receipt of a line containing 0 characters.



If you have to deal with a parsing word that does not have a non-parsing
factor, you can use @code{execute-parsing} to pass a string to it:

@findex execute-parsing ( @var{ ... addr u xt -- ...   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{execute-parsing}
@kindex execute-parsing
@format
@code{execute-parsing} ( @i{... addr u xt -- ...  }) gforth-0.6 ``execute-parsing''
@end format
Make @i{addr u} the current input source, execute @i{xt @code{( ... --
... )}}, then restore the previous input source.



Example:

@example
5 s" foo" ' constant execute-parsing
\ equivalent to
5 constant foo
@end example

A definition of this word in Standard Forth is provided in
@file{compat/execute-parsing.fs}.

If you want to run a parsing word on a file, the following word should help:

@findex execute-parsing-file ( @var{ i*x fileid xt -- j*x   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{execute-parsing-file}
@kindex execute-parsing-file
@format
@code{execute-parsing-file} ( @i{i*x fileid xt -- j*x  }) gforth-0.6 ``execute-parsing-file''
@end format
Make @i{fileid} the current input source, execute @i{xt @code{( i*x -- j*x
)}}, then restore the previous input source.



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Word Lists, Environmental Queries, The Input Stream, Words
@section Word Lists
@cindex word lists
@cindex header space

A wordlist is a list of named words; you can add new words and look up words
by name (and you can remove words in a restricted way with markers).  Every
named (and @code{reveal}ed) word is in one wordlist.

@cindex search order stack
The text interpreter searches the wordlists present in the search order (a
stack of wordlists), from the top to the bottom.  Within each wordlist, the
search starts conceptually at the newest word; i.e., if two words in a
wordlist have the same name, the newer word is found.

@cindex compilation word list
New words are added to the @dfn{compilation wordlist} (aka current
wordlist).

@cindex wid
A word list is identified by a cell-sized word list identifier (@i{wid})  in
much the same way as a file is identified by a file handle. The numerical
value of the wid has no (portable) meaning, and might change from session to
session.

The Standard Forth ``Search order'' word set is intended to provide a set of
low-level tools that allow various different schemes to be
implemented. Gforth also provides @code{vocabulary}, a traditional Forth
word.  @file{compat/vocabulary.fs} provides an implementation in Standard
Forth.

@comment TODO: locals section refers to here, saying that every word list (aka
@comment vocabulary) has its own methods for searching etc. Need to document that.
@c anton: but better in a separate subsection on wordlist internals

@comment TODO: document markers, reveal, tables, mappedwordlist

@comment the gforthman- prefix is used to pick out the true definition of a
@comment word from the source files, rather than some alias.

@findex forth-wordlist ( @var{ -- wid   } ) search
@cindex @code{forth-wordlist}
@kindex forth-wordlist
@format
@code{forth-wordlist} ( @i{-- wid  }) search ``forth-wordlist''
@end format
@code{Constant} -- @i{wid} identifies the word list that includes all of the
standard words provided by Gforth. When Gforth is invoked, this word list is
the compilation word list and is at the top of the search order.


@findex definitions ( @var{ --   } ) search
@cindex @code{definitions}
@kindex definitions
@format
@code{definitions} ( @i{--  }) search ``definitions''
@end format
Set the compilation word list to be the same as the word list that is
currently at the top of the search order.


@findex get-current ( @var{ -- wid   } ) search
@cindex @code{get-current}
@kindex get-current
@format
@code{get-current} ( @i{-- wid  }) search ``get-current''
@end format
@i{wid} is the identifier of the current compilation word list.


@findex set-current ( @var{ wid --   } ) search
@cindex @code{set-current}
@kindex set-current
@format
@code{set-current} ( @i{wid --  }) search ``set-current''
@end format
Set the compilation word list to the word list identified by @i{wid}.


@findex get-order ( @var{ -- widn .. wid1 n   } ) search
@cindex @code{get-order}
@kindex get-order
@format
@code{get-order} ( @i{-- widn .. wid1 n  }) search ``get-order''
@end format
Copy the search order to the data stack. The current search order has @i{n}
entries, of which @i{wid1} represents the wordlist that is searched first
(the word list at the top of the search order) and @i{widn} represents the
wordlist that is searched last.


@findex set-order ( @var{ widn .. wid1 n --   } ) search
@cindex @code{set-order}
@kindex set-order
@format
@code{set-order} ( @i{widn .. wid1 n --  }) search ``set-order''
@end format
If @var{n}=0, empty the search order.  If @var{n}=-1, set the search order
to the implementation-defined minimum search order (for Gforth, this is the
word list @code{Root}). Otherwise, replace the existing search order with
the @var{n} wid entries such that @var{wid1} represents the word list that
will be searched first and @var{widn} represents the word list that will be
searched last.


@findex wordlist ( @var{ -- wid   } ) search
@cindex @code{wordlist}
@kindex wordlist
@format
@code{wordlist} ( @i{-- wid  }) search ``wordlist''
@end format
Create a new, empty word list represented by @i{wid}.


@findex table ( @var{ -- wid   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{table}
@kindex table
@format
@code{table} ( @i{-- wid  }) gforth-0.2 ``table''
@end format
Create a lookup table (case-sensitive, no warnings).


@findex cs-wordlist ( @var{ -- wid   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{cs-wordlist}
@kindex cs-wordlist
@format
@code{cs-wordlist} ( @i{-- wid  }) gforth-1.0 ``cs-wordlist''
@end format
Create a case-sensitive wordlist.


@findex cs-vocabulary ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{cs-vocabulary}
@kindex cs-vocabulary
@format
@code{cs-vocabulary} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``cs-vocabulary''
@end format
Create a case-sensitive vocabulary


@findex >order ( @var{ wid --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{>order}
@kindex >order
@format
@code{>order} ( @i{wid --  }) gforth-0.5 ``to-order''
@end format
Push @var{wid} on the search order.


@findex previous ( @var{ --   } ) search-ext
@cindex @code{previous}
@kindex previous
@format
@code{previous} ( @i{--  }) search-ext ``previous''
@end format
Drop the wordlist at the top of the search order.


@findex also ( @var{ --   } ) search-ext
@cindex @code{also}
@kindex also
@format
@code{also} ( @i{--  }) search-ext ``also''
@end format
Like @code{DUP} for the search order. Usually used before a vocabulary
(e.g., @code{also Forth}); the combined effect is to push the wordlist
represented by the vocabulary on the search order.


@findex Forth ( @var{ --   } ) search-ext
@cindex @code{Forth}
@kindex Forth
@format
@code{Forth} ( @i{--  }) search-ext ``Forth''
@end format
Replace the @i{wid} at the top of the search order with the @i{wid}
associated with the word list @code{forth-wordlist}.


@findex Only ( @var{ --   } ) search-ext
@cindex @code{Only}
@kindex Only
@format
@code{Only} ( @i{--  }) search-ext ``Only''
@end format
Set the search order to the implementation-defined minimum search order (for
Gforth, this is the word list @code{Root}).


@findex order ( @var{ --   } ) search-ext
@cindex @code{order}
@kindex order
@format
@code{order} ( @i{--  }) search-ext ``order''
@end format
Print the search order and the compilation word list.  The word lists are
printed in the order in which they are searched (which is reversed with
respect to the conventional way of displaying stacks). The compilation word
list is displayed last.


@findex .voc ( @var{ wid --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{.voc}
@kindex .voc
@format
@code{.voc} ( @i{wid --  }) gforth-0.2 ``dot-voc''
@end format
print the name of the wordlist represented by @var{wid}.  Can only print
names defined with @code{vocabulary} or @code{wordlist constant}, otherwise
prints @samp{address}.



@findex find ( @var{ c-addr -- xt +-1 | c-addr 0   } ) core,search
@cindex @code{find}
@kindex find
@format
@code{find} ( @i{c-addr -- xt +-1 | c-addr 0  }) core,search ``find''
@end format
Search all word lists in the current search order for the definition named
by the counted string at @i{c-addr}.  If the definition is not found, return
0. If the definition is found return 1 (if the definition has non-default
compilation semantics) or -1 (if the definition has default compilation
semantics).  The @i{xt} returned in interpret state represents the
interpretation semantics.  The @i{xt} returned in compile state represented
either the compilation semantics (for non-default compilation semantics) or
the run-time semantics that the compilation semantics would @code{compile,}
(for default compilation semantics).  The ANS Forth standard does not
specify clearly what the returned @i{xt} represents (and also talks about
immediacy instead of non-default compilation semantics), so this word is
questionable in portable programs.  If non-portability is ok,
@code{find-name} and friends are better (@pxref{Name token}).


@findex search-wordlist ( @var{ c-addr count wid -- 0 | xt +-1   } ) search
@cindex @code{search-wordlist}
@kindex search-wordlist
@format
@code{search-wordlist} ( @i{c-addr count wid -- 0 | xt +-1  }) search ``search-wordlist''
@end format
Search the word list identified by @i{wid} for the definition named by the
string at @i{c-addr count}.  If the definition is not found, return 0. If
the definition is found return 1 (if the definition is immediate) or -1 (if
the definition is not immediate) together with the @i{xt}.  In Gforth, the
@i{xt} returned represents the interpretation semantics.  ANS Forth does not
specify clearly what @i{xt} represents.



@findex words ( @var{ --   } ) tools
@cindex @code{words}
@kindex words
@format
@code{words} ( @i{--  }) tools ``words''
@end format
Display a list of all of the definitions in the word list at the top of the
search order.


@findex vlist ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{vlist}
@kindex vlist
@format
@code{vlist} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``vlist''
@end format
Old (pre-Forth-83) name for @code{WORDS}.


@findex wordlist-words ( @var{ wid --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{wordlist-words}
@kindex wordlist-words
@format
@code{wordlist-words} ( @i{wid --  }) gforth-0.6 ``wordlist-words''
@end format
Display the contents of the wordlist wid.


@findex mwords ( @var{ ["pattern"] --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{mwords}
@kindex mwords
@format
@code{mwords} ( @i{["pattern"] --  }) gforth-1.0 ``mwords''
@end format
list all words matching the optional parameter @var{pattern}; if none, all
words match.  Words are listed old to new.  Pattern match like @code{search}
(default), you can switch to globbing with @code{' mword-filename-match is
mword-match}.


@c doc-words-deferred

@c doc-mappedwordlist @c map-structure undefined, implemantation-specific
@findex Root ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{Root}
@kindex Root
@format
@code{Root} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``Root''
@end format
Add the root wordlist to the search order stack.  This vocabulary makes up
the minimum search order and contains only a search-order words.


@findex Vocabulary ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{Vocabulary}
@kindex Vocabulary
@format
@code{Vocabulary} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``Vocabulary''
@end format
Create a definition "name" and associate a new word list with it.  The
run-time effect of "name" is to replace the @i{wid} at the top of the search
order with the @i{wid} associated with the new word list.


@findex seal ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{seal}
@kindex seal
@format
@code{seal} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``seal''
@end format
Remove all word lists from the search order stack other than the word list
that is currently on the top of the search order stack.


@findex vocs ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{vocs}
@kindex vocs
@format
@code{vocs} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``vocs''
@end format
List vocabularies and wordlists defined in the system.


@findex current ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{current}
@kindex current
@format
@code{current} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``current''
@end format
@code{Variable} -- holds the @i{wid} of the compilation word list.


@findex context ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{context}
@kindex context
@format
@code{context} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``context''
@end format
@code{context} @code{@@} is the @i{wid} of the word list at the top of the
search order.



@findex map-vocs ( @var{ ... xt -- ...   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{map-vocs}
@kindex map-vocs
@format
@code{map-vocs} ( @i{... xt -- ...  }) gforth-1.0 ``map-vocs''
@end format
Perform xt ( ... wid -- ... ) for all wordlists (including tables and
cs-wordlists) in the system.



@menu
* Vocabularies::
* Why use word lists?::
* Word list example::        
@end menu

@node Vocabularies, Why use word lists?, Word Lists, Word Lists
@subsection Vocabularies
@cindex Vocabularies, detailed explanation

Here is an example of creating and using a new wordlist using Standard Forth
words:

@example
wordlist constant my-new-words-wordlist
: my-new-words get-order nip my-new-words-wordlist swap set-order ;

\ add it to the search order
also my-new-words

\ alternatively, add it to the search order and make it
\ the compilation word list
also my-new-words definitions
\ type "order" to see the problem
@end example

The problem with this example is that @code{order} has no way to associate
the name @code{my-new-words} with the wid of the word list (in Gforth,
@code{order} and @code{vocs} will display @code{???} for a wid that has no
associated name). There is no Standard way of associating a name with a wid.

In Gforth, this example can be re-coded using @code{vocabulary}, which
associates a name with a wid:

@example
vocabulary my-new-words

\ add it to the search order
also my-new-words

\ alternatively, add it to the search order and make it
\ the compilation word list
my-new-words definitions
\ type "order" to see that the problem is solved
@end example


@node Why use word lists?, Word list example, Vocabularies, Word Lists
@subsection Why use word lists?
@cindex word lists - why use them?

Here are some reasons why people use wordlists:

@itemize @bullet

@c anton: Gforth's hashing implementation makes the search speed
@c independent from the number of words.  But it is linear with the number
@c of wordlists that have to be searched, so in effect using more wordlists
@c actually slows down compilation.

@c @item
@c To improve compilation speed by reducing the number of header space
@c entries that must be searched. This is achieved by creating a new
@c word list that contains all of the definitions that are used in the
@c definition of a Forth system but which would not usually be used by
@c programs running on that system. That word list would be on the search
@c list when the Forth system was compiled but would be removed from the
@c search list for normal operation. This can be a useful technique for
@c low-performance systems (for example, 8-bit processors in embedded
@c systems) but is unlikely to be necessary in high-performance desktop
@c systems.

@item
To prevent a set of words from being used outside the context in which they
are valid. Two classic examples of this are an integrated editor (all of the
edit commands are defined in a separate word list; the search order is set
to the editor word list when the editor is invoked; the old search order is
restored when the editor is terminated) and an integrated assembler (the
op-codes for the machine are defined in a separate word list which is used
when a @code{CODE} word is defined).

@item
To organize the words of an application or library into a user-visible set
(in @code{forth-wordlist} or some other common wordlist) and a set of helper
words used just for the implementation (hidden in a separate wordlist).
This keeps @code{words}' output smaller, separates implementation and
interface, and reduces the chance of name conflicts within the common
wordlist.

@item
To prevent a name-space clash between multiple definitions with the same
name. For example, when building a cross-compiler you might have a word
@code{IF} that generates conditional code for your target system. By placing
this definition in a different word list you can control whether the host
system's @code{IF} or the target system's @code{IF} get used in any
particular context by controlling the order of the word lists on the search
order stack.

@end itemize

The downsides of using wordlists are:

@itemize

@item
Debugging becomes more cumbersome.

@item
Name conflicts worked around with wordlists are still there, and you have to
arrange the search order carefully to get the desired results; if you forget
to do that, you get hard-to-find errors (as in any case where you read the
code differently from the compiler; @code{see} can help seeing which of
several possible words the name resolves to in such cases).  @code{See}
displays just the name of the words, not what wordlist they belong to, so it
might be misleading.  Using unique names is a better approach to avoid name
conflicts.

@item
You have to explicitly undo any changes to the search order.  In many cases
it would be more convenient if this happened implicitly.  Gforth currently
does not provide such a feature, but it may do so in the future.
@end itemize


@node Word list example, , Why use word lists?, Word Lists
@subsection Word list example
@cindex word lists - example

The following example is from the
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/garbage-collection.zip,
garbage collector} and uses wordlists to separate public words from helper
words:

@example
get-current ( wid )
vocabulary garbage-collector also garbage-collector definitions
... \ define helper words
( wid ) set-current \ restore original (i.e., public) compilation wordlist
... \ define the public (i.e., API) words
    \ they can refer to the helper words
previous \ restore original search order (helper words become invisible)
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Environmental Queries, Files, Word Lists, Words
@section Environmental Queries
@cindex environmental queries

Forth-94 introduced the idea of ``environmental queries'' as a way for a
program running on a system to determine certain characteristics of the
system.  The Standard specifies a number of strings that might be recognised
by a system, and a way of querying them:

@findex environment? ( @var{ c-addr u -- false / ... true   } ) core
@cindex @code{environment?}
@kindex environment?
@format
@code{environment?} ( @i{c-addr u -- false / ... true  }) core ``environment-query''
@end format
@i{c-addr, u} specify a counted string. If the string is not recognised,
return a @code{false} flag. Otherwise return a @code{true} flag and some
(string-specific) information about the queried string.



Note that, whilst the documentation for (e.g.)  @code{ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS}
shows it returning one cell on the stack, querying it using
@code{environment?} will return an additional item; the @code{true} flag
that shows that the string was recognised; so for querying
@code{ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS} the stack effect of @code{environment?} is @code{(
c-addr u -- n true )}.

@c Get all the words in environment-wordlist:
@c gforth -e "environment-wordlist wordlist-words cr bye"|sed 's/[ ]/\n/g'|sed '/^$/d'|tac

Several environmental queries deal with the system's limits:

@findex ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS}
@kindex ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS
@format
@code{ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS''
@end format
Size of one address unit, in bits.


@findex MAX-CHAR ( @var{ -- u   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-CHAR}
@kindex MAX-CHAR
@format
@code{MAX-CHAR} ( @i{-- u  }) environment ``MAX-CHAR''
@end format
Maximum value of any character in the character set


@findex /COUNTED-STRING ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{/COUNTED-STRING}
@kindex /COUNTED-STRING
@format
@code{/COUNTED-STRING} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``slash-counted-string''
@end format
Maximum size of a counted string, in characters.


@findex /HOLD ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{/HOLD}
@kindex /HOLD
@format
@code{/HOLD} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``slash-hold''
@end format
Size of the pictured numeric string output buffer, in characters.


@findex /PAD ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{/PAD}
@kindex /PAD
@format
@code{/PAD} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``slash-pad''
@end format
Size of the scratch area pointed to by @code{PAD}, in characters.


@findex CORE ( @var{ -- f   } ) environment
@cindex @code{CORE}
@kindex CORE
@format
@code{CORE} ( @i{-- f  }) environment ``CORE''
@end format
True if the complete core word set is present. Always true for Gforth.


@findex CORE-EXT ( @var{ -- f   } ) environment
@cindex @code{CORE-EXT}
@kindex CORE-EXT
@format
@code{CORE-EXT} ( @i{-- f  }) environment ``CORE-EXT''
@end format
True if the complete core extension word set is present. Always true for
Gforth.


@findex FLOORED ( @var{ -- f   } ) environment
@cindex @code{FLOORED}
@kindex FLOORED
@format
@code{FLOORED} ( @i{-- f  }) environment ``FLOORED''
@end format
True if @code{/} etc. perform floored division


@findex MAX-N ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-N}
@kindex MAX-N
@format
@code{MAX-N} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``MAX-N''
@end format
Largest usable signed integer.


@findex MAX-U ( @var{ -- u   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-U}
@kindex MAX-U
@format
@code{MAX-U} ( @i{-- u  }) environment ``MAX-U''
@end format
Largest usable unsigned integer.


@findex MAX-D ( @var{ -- d   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-D}
@kindex MAX-D
@format
@code{MAX-D} ( @i{-- d  }) environment ``MAX-D''
@end format
Largest usable signed double.


@findex MAX-UD ( @var{ -- ud   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-UD}
@kindex MAX-UD
@format
@code{MAX-UD} ( @i{-- ud  }) environment ``MAX-UD''
@end format
Largest usable unsigned double.


@findex return-stack-cells ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{return-stack-cells}
@kindex return-stack-cells
@format
@code{return-stack-cells} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``return-stack-cells''
@end format
Maximum size of the return stack, in cells.


@findex stack-cells ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{stack-cells}
@kindex stack-cells
@format
@code{stack-cells} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``stack-cells''
@end format
Maximum size of the data stack, in cells.


@findex floating-stack ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{floating-stack}
@kindex floating-stack
@format
@code{floating-stack} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``floating-stack''
@end format
@var{n} is non-zero, showing that Gforth maintains a separate floating-point
stack of depth @var{n}.


@findex #locals ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{#locals}
@kindex #locals
@format
@code{#locals} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``number-locals''
@end format
The maximum number of locals in a definition


@findex wordlists ( @var{ -- n   } ) environment
@cindex @code{wordlists}
@kindex wordlists
@format
@code{wordlists} ( @i{-- n  }) environment ``wordlists''
@end format
the maximum number of wordlists usable in the search order


@findex max-float ( @var{ -- r   } ) environment
@cindex @code{max-float}
@kindex max-float
@format
@code{max-float} ( @i{-- r  }) environment ``max-float''
@end format
The largest usable floating-point number (implemented as largest finite
number in Gforth)


@findex XCHAR-ENCODING ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) environment
@cindex @code{XCHAR-ENCODING}
@kindex XCHAR-ENCODING
@format
@code{XCHAR-ENCODING} ( @i{-- addr u  }) environment ``XCHAR-ENCODING''
@end format
Returns a printable ASCII string that reperesents the encoding, and use the
preferred MIME name (if any) or the name in
@url{http://www.iana.org/assignments/character-sets} like ``ISO-LATIN-1'' or
``UTF-8'', with the exception of ``ASCII'', where we prefer the alias
``ASCII''.


@findex MAX-XCHAR ( @var{ -- xchar   } ) environment
@cindex @code{MAX-XCHAR}
@kindex MAX-XCHAR
@format
@code{MAX-XCHAR} ( @i{-- xchar  }) environment ``MAX-XCHAR''
@end format
Maximal value for xchar.  This depends on the encoding.


@findex XCHAR-MAXMEM ( @var{ -- u   } ) environment
@cindex @code{XCHAR-MAXMEM}
@kindex XCHAR-MAXMEM
@format
@code{XCHAR-MAXMEM} ( @i{-- u  }) environment ``XCHAR-MAXMEM''
@end format
Maximal memory consumed by an xchar in address units



Several environemtal queries are there for determining the presence of the
Forth-94 version of a wordset; they all have the stack effect @code{( -- f
)} if the string is present (so the @code{environment?} stack effect for
these queries is @code{( c-addr u -- false / f true )}.

@code{block block-ext double double-ext exception exception-ext facility
facility-ext file file-ext floating floating-ext locals locals-ext
memory-alloc memory-alloc-ext tools tools-ext search-order search-order-ext
string string-ext}

These wordset queries were rarely used and implemented, so Forth-2012 did
not introduce a way to query for the Forth-2012 variants of the wordsets.
Instead, the idea is that you use @code{[defined]} (@pxref{Interpreter
Directives}) instead.

Forth-200x (a group that works on the next standard; the documents that they
produce are also called Forth-200x) defines extension queries for the
extension proposals once they finish changing (CfV stage), so programs using
these proposals can check whether a system has them, and maybe load the
reference implementation (if one exists).  If @code{environment?} finds such
a query, then the corresponding proposal on @url{www.forth200x.org} is
implemented on the system (but the absence tells you nothing, as usual with
@code{environment?}).  These queries have the stack effect @code{( -- )},
which means that for them @code{environment?} has the stack effect @code{(
c-addr u -- false / true )}, which is more convenient than that of wordset
queries.  A number of these proposals have been incorporated into
Forth-2012.  The extension queries are also not particularly popular among
Forth system implementors, so going for @code{[defined]} may be the better
approach.  Anyway, Gforth implements the following extension queries:

@code{X:2value X:buffer X:deferred X:defined X:ekeys X:escaped-strings
X:extension-query X:fp-stack X:ftrunc X:fvalue X:locals X:n-to-r
X:number-prefixes X:parse-name X:required X:s-escape-quote X:s-to-f
X:structures X:synonym X:text-substitution X:throw-iors X:traverse-wordlist
X:xchar}

In addition, Gforth implements the following Gforth-specific queries:

@findex gforth ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-environment
@cindex @code{gforth}
@kindex gforth
@format
@code{gforth} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-environment ``gforth''
@end format
Counted string representing a version string for this version of Gforth (for
versions>0.3.0).  The version strings of the various versions are guaranteed
to be ordered lexicographically.


@findex os-class ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-environment
@cindex @code{os-class}
@kindex os-class
@format
@code{os-class} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-environment ``os-class''
@end format
Counted string representing a description of the host operating system.


@findex os-type ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-environment
@cindex @code{os-type}
@kindex os-type
@format
@code{os-type} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-environment ``os-type''
@end format
Counted string equal to "$host_os"



The Standard requires that the header space used for environmental queries
be distinct from the header space used for definitions.

Typically, a Forth system supports environmental queries by creating a set
of definitions in a wordlist that is @i{only} used for environmental
queries; that is what Gforth does. There is no Standard way of adding
definitions to the set of recognised environmental queries, but in Gforth
and other systems that use the wordlist mechanism, the wordlist used to
honour environmental queries can be manipulated just like any other word
list.

@findex environment-wordlist ( @var{ -- wid   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{environment-wordlist}
@kindex environment-wordlist
@format
@code{environment-wordlist} ( @i{-- wid  }) gforth-0.2 ``environment-wordlist''
@end format
@i{wid} identifies the word list that is searched by environmental queries
(present in SwiftForth and VFX).


@findex environment ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{environment}
@kindex environment
@format
@code{environment} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.6 ``environment''
@end format
A vocabulary for @code{environment-wordlist} (present in Win32Forth and
VFX).



@comment TODO Document the standard strings or note where they are documented herein

Here are some examples of using environmental queries:

@example
s" address-unit-bits" environment? 0=
[IF]
     cr .( environmental attribute address-units-bits unknown... ) cr
[ELSE]
     drop \ ensure balanced stack effect
[THEN]

\ this might occur in the prelude of a standard program that uses THROW
s" exception" environment? [IF]
   0= [IF]
      : throw abort" exception thrown" ;
   [THEN]
[ELSE] \ we don't know, so make sure
   : throw abort" exception thrown" ;
[THEN]

s" gforth" environment? [IF] .( Gforth version ) TYPE
                        [ELSE] .( Not Gforth..) [THEN]

\ a program using v*
s" gforth" environment? [IF]
  s" 0.5.0" compare 0< [IF] \ v* is a primitive since 0.5.0
   : v* ( f_addr1 nstride1 f_addr2 nstride2 ucount -- r )
     >r swap 2swap swap 0e r> 0 ?DO
       dup f@@ over + 2swap dup f@@ f* f+ over + 2swap
     LOOP
     2drop 2drop ; 
  [THEN]
[ELSE] \ 
  : v* ( f_addr1 nstride1 f_addr2 nstride2 ucount -- r )
  ...
[THEN]
@end example

Here is an example of adding a definition to the environment word list:

@example
get-current environment-wordlist set-current
true constant block
true constant block-ext
set-current
@end example

You can see what definitions are in the environment word list like this:

@example
environment-wordlist wordlist-words
@end example


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Files, Blocks, Environmental Queries, Words
@section Files
@cindex files
@cindex I/O - file-handling

Gforth provides facilities for accessing files that are stored in the host
operating system's file-system. Files that are processed by Gforth can be
divided into two categories:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Files that are processed by the Text Interpreter (@dfn{Forth source files}).
@item
Files that are processed by some other program (@dfn{general files}).
@end itemize

@menu
* Forth source files::
* General files::
* Redirection::
* Directories::
* Search Paths::             
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Forth source files, General files, Files, Files
@subsection Forth source files
@cindex including files
@cindex Forth source files

The simplest way to interpret the contents of a file is to use one of these
two formats:

@example
include mysource.fs
s" mysource.fs" included
@end example

You usually want to include a file only if it is not included already (by,
say, another source file). In that case, you can use one of these three
formats:

@example
require mysource.fs
needs mysource.fs
s" mysource.fs" required
@end example

@cindex stack effect of included files
@cindex including files, stack effect
It is good practice to write your source files such that interpreting them
does not change the stack. Source files designed in this way can be used
with @code{required} and friends without complications. For example:

@example
1024 require foo.fs drop
@end example

Here you want to pass the argument 1024 (e.g., a buffer size) to
@file{foo.fs}.  Interpreting @file{foo.fs} has the stack effect ( n -- n ),
which allows its use with @code{require}.  Of course with such parameters to
required files, you have to ensure that the first @code{require} fits for
all uses (i.e., @code{require} it early in the master load file).

@findex include-file ( @var{ i*x wfileid -- j*x   } ) file
@cindex @code{include-file}
@kindex include-file
@format
@code{include-file} ( @i{i*x wfileid -- j*x  }) file ``include-file''
@end format
Interpret (process using the text interpreter) the contents of the file
@var{wfileid}.


@findex included ( @var{ i*x c-addr u -- j*x   } ) file
@cindex @code{included}
@kindex included
@format
@code{included} ( @i{i*x c-addr u -- j*x  }) file ``included''
@end format
@code{include-file} the file whose name is given by the string @var{c-addr
u}.


@findex included? ( @var{ c-addr u -- f   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{included?}
@kindex included?
@format
@code{included?} ( @i{c-addr u -- f  }) gforth-0.2 ``included?''
@end format
True only if the file @var{c-addr u} is in the list of earlier included
files. If the file has been loaded, it may have been specified as, say,
@file{foo.fs} and found somewhere on the Forth search path. To return
@code{true} from @code{included?}, you must specify the exact path to the
file, even if that is @file{./foo.fs}


@findex include ( @var{ ... "file" -- ...   } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{include}
@kindex include
@format
@code{include} ( @i{... "file" -- ...  }) file-ext ``include''
@end format
@code{include-file} the file @var{file}.


@findex required ( @var{ i*x addr u -- i*x   } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{required}
@kindex required
@format
@code{required} ( @i{i*x addr u -- i*x  }) file-ext ``required''
@end format
@code{include-file} the file with the name given by @var{addr u}, if it is
not @code{included} (or @code{required})  already. Currently this works by
comparing the name of the file (with path) against the names of earlier
included files.


@findex require ( @var{ ... "file" -- ...   } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{require}
@kindex require
@format
@code{require} ( @i{... "file" -- ...  }) file-ext ``require''
@end format
@code{include-file} @var{file} only if it is not included already.


@findex needs ( @var{ ... "name" -- ...   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{needs}
@kindex needs
@format
@code{needs} ( @i{... "name" -- ...  }) gforth-0.2 ``needs''
@end format
An alias for @code{require}; exists on other systems (e.g., Win32Forth).


@findex \\\ ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{\\\}
@kindex \\\
@format
@code{\\\} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``\\\''
@end format
skip remaining source file


@findex .included ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{.included}
@kindex .included
@format
@code{.included} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.5 ``.included''
@end format
List the names of the files that have been @code{included}.


@c doc-init-included-files @c internal
@findex sourcefilename ( @var{ -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{sourcefilename}
@kindex sourcefilename
@format
@code{sourcefilename} ( @i{-- c-addr u  }) gforth-0.2 ``sourcefilename''
@end format
The name of the source file which is currently the input source.  The result
is valid only while the file is being loaded.  If the current input source
is no (stream) file, the result is undefined.  In Gforth, the result is
valid during the whole session (but not across @code{savesystem} etc.).


@findex sourceline# ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{sourceline#}
@kindex sourceline#
@format
@code{sourceline#} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-0.2 ``sourceline-number''
@end format
The line number of the line that is currently being interpreted from a
(stream) file. The first line has the number 1. If the current input source
is not a (stream) file, the result is undefined.



A definition in Standard Forth for @code{required} is provided in
@file{compat/required.fs}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node General files, Redirection, Forth source files, Files
@subsection General files
@cindex general files
@cindex file-handling

Files are opened/created by name and type. The following file access methods
(FAMs) are recognised:

@cindex fam (file access method)
@findex r/o ( @var{ -- fam   } ) file
@cindex @code{r/o}
@kindex r/o
@format
@code{r/o} ( @i{-- fam  }) file ``r-o''
@end format

@findex r/w ( @var{ -- fam   } ) file
@cindex @code{r/w}
@kindex r/w
@format
@code{r/w} ( @i{-- fam  }) file ``r-w''
@end format

@findex w/o ( @var{ -- fam   } ) file
@cindex @code{w/o}
@kindex w/o
@format
@code{w/o} ( @i{-- fam  }) file ``w-o''
@end format

@findex bin ( @var{ fam1 -- fam2   } ) file
@cindex @code{bin}
@kindex bin
@format
@code{bin} ( @i{fam1 -- fam2  }) file ``bin''
@end format

@findex +fmode ( @var{ fam1 rwxrwxrwx -- fam2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{+fmode}
@kindex +fmode
@format
@code{+fmode} ( @i{fam1 rwxrwxrwx -- fam2  }) gforth-1.0 ``plus-f-mode''
@end format
add file access mode to fam - for create-file only




When a file is opened/created, it returns a file identifier, @i{wfileid}
that is used for all other file commands. All file commands also return a
status value, @i{wior}, that is 0 for a successful operation and an
implementation-defined non-zero value in the case of an error.


@findex open-file ( @var{ c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{open-file}
@kindex open-file
@format
@code{open-file} ( @i{c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior }) file ``open-file''
@end format

@findex create-file ( @var{ c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{create-file}
@kindex create-file
@format
@code{create-file} ( @i{c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior }) file ``create-file''
@end format


@findex close-file ( @var{ wfileid -- wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{close-file}
@kindex close-file
@format
@code{close-file} ( @i{wfileid -- wior }) file ``close-file''
@end format

@findex delete-file ( @var{ c-addr u -- wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{delete-file}
@kindex delete-file
@format
@code{delete-file} ( @i{c-addr u -- wior }) file ``delete-file''
@end format

@findex rename-file ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- wior  } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{rename-file}
@kindex rename-file
@format
@code{rename-file} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- wior }) file-ext ``rename-file''
@end format
Rename file @i{c_addr1 u1} to new name @i{c_addr2 u2}

@findex read-file ( @var{ c-addr u1 wfileid -- u2 wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{read-file}
@kindex read-file
@format
@code{read-file} ( @i{c-addr u1 wfileid -- u2 wior }) file ``read-file''
@end format
Read @i{u1} characters from file @i{wfileid} into the buffer at @i{c_addr}.
A non-zero @i{wior} indicates an error.  @i{U2} indicates the length of the
read data.  End-of-file is not an error and is indicated by @i{u2}$<$@i{u1}
and @i{wior}=0.

@findex read-line ( @var{ c_addr u1 wfileid -- u2 flag wior   } ) file
@cindex @code{read-line}
@kindex read-line
@format
@code{read-line} ( @i{c_addr u1 wfileid -- u2 flag wior  }) file ``read-line''
@end format
Reads a line from @i{wfileid} into the buffer at @i{c_addr u1}.  Gforth
supports all three common line terminators: LF, CR and CRLF.  A non-zero
@i{wior} indicates an error.  A false @i{flag} indicates that
@code{read-line} has been invoked at the end of the file. @i{u2} indicates
the line length (without terminator): @i{u2}$<$@i{u1} indicates that the
line is @i{u2} chars long; @i{u2}=@i{u1} indicates that the line is at least
@i{u1} chars long, the @i{u1} chars of the buffer have been filled with
chars from the line, and the next slice of the line with be read with the
next @code{read-line}.  If the line is @i{u1} chars long, the first
@code{read-line} returns @i{u2}=@i{u1} and the next read-line returns
@i{u2}=0.


@findex key-file ( @var{ fd -- key   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{key-file}
@kindex key-file
@format
@code{key-file} ( @i{fd -- key  }) gforth-0.4 ``key-file''
@end format
Read one character @i{n} from @i{wfileid}.  This word disables buffering for
@i{wfileid}.  If you want to read characters from a terminal in
non-canonical (raw) mode, you have to put the terminal in non-canonical mode
yourself (using the C interface); the exception is @code{stdin}: Gforth
automatically puts it into non-canonical mode.


@findex key?-file ( @var{ wfileid -- f  } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{key?-file}
@kindex key?-file
@format
@code{key?-file} ( @i{wfileid -- f }) gforth-0.4 ``key-q-file''
@end format
@i{f} is true if at least one character can be read from @i{wfileid} without
blocking.  If you also want to use @code{read-file} or @code{read-line} on
the file, you have to call @code{key?-file} or @code{key-file} first (these
two words disable buffering).

@findex file-eof? ( @var{ wfileid -- flag  } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{file-eof?}
@kindex file-eof?
@format
@code{file-eof?} ( @i{wfileid -- flag }) gforth-0.6 ``file-eof-query''
@end format
@var{Flag} is true if the end-of-file indicator for @var{wfileid} is set.

@findex write-file ( @var{ c-addr u1 wfileid -- wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{write-file}
@kindex write-file
@format
@code{write-file} ( @i{c-addr u1 wfileid -- wior }) file ``write-file''
@end format

@findex write-line ( @var{ c-addr u wfileid -- ior   } ) file
@cindex @code{write-line}
@kindex write-line
@format
@code{write-line} ( @i{c-addr u wfileid -- ior  }) file ``write-line''
@end format

@findex emit-file ( @var{ c wfileid -- wior  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{emit-file}
@kindex emit-file
@format
@code{emit-file} ( @i{c wfileid -- wior }) gforth-0.2 ``emit-file''
@end format

@findex flush-file ( @var{ wfileid -- wior  } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{flush-file}
@kindex flush-file
@format
@code{flush-file} ( @i{wfileid -- wior }) file-ext ``flush-file''
@end format


@findex file-status ( @var{ c-addr u -- wfam wior  } ) file-ext
@cindex @code{file-status}
@kindex file-status
@format
@code{file-status} ( @i{c-addr u -- wfam wior }) file-ext ``file-status''
@end format

@findex file-position ( @var{ wfileid -- ud wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{file-position}
@kindex file-position
@format
@code{file-position} ( @i{wfileid -- ud wior }) file ``file-position''
@end format

@findex reposition-file ( @var{ ud wfileid -- wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{reposition-file}
@kindex reposition-file
@format
@code{reposition-file} ( @i{ud wfileid -- wior }) file ``reposition-file''
@end format

@findex file-size ( @var{ wfileid -- ud wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{file-size}
@kindex file-size
@format
@code{file-size} ( @i{wfileid -- ud wior }) file ``file-size''
@end format

@findex resize-file ( @var{ ud wfileid -- wior  } ) file
@cindex @code{resize-file}
@kindex resize-file
@format
@code{resize-file} ( @i{ud wfileid -- wior }) file ``resize-file''
@end format


@findex slurp-file ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{slurp-file}
@kindex slurp-file
@format
@code{slurp-file} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2  }) gforth-0.6 ``slurp-file''
@end format
@var{c-addr1 u1} is the filename, @var{c-addr2 u2} is the file's contents


@findex slurp-fid ( @var{ fid -- addr u   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{slurp-fid}
@kindex slurp-fid
@format
@code{slurp-fid} ( @i{fid -- addr u  }) gforth-0.6 ``slurp-fid''
@end format
@var{addr u} is the content of the file @var{fid}


@findex stdin ( @var{ -- wfileid  } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{stdin}
@kindex stdin
@format
@code{stdin} ( @i{-- wfileid }) gforth-0.4 ``stdin''
@end format
The standard input file of the Gforth process.

@findex stdout ( @var{ -- wfileid  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{stdout}
@kindex stdout
@format
@code{stdout} ( @i{-- wfileid }) gforth-0.2 ``stdout''
@end format
The standard output file of the Gforth process.

@findex stderr ( @var{ -- wfileid  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{stderr}
@kindex stderr
@format
@code{stderr} ( @i{-- wfileid }) gforth-0.2 ``stderr''
@end format
The standard error output file of the Gforth process.


@c ---------------------------------------------------------
@node Redirection, Directories, General files, Files
@subsection Redirection
@cindex Redirection
@cindex Input Redirection
@cindex Output Redirection

You can redirect the output of @code{type} and @code{emit} and all the words
that use them (all output words that don't have an explicit target file) to
an arbitrary file with the @code{outfile-execute}, used like this:

@example
: some-warning ( n -- )
    cr ." warning# " . ;

: print-some-warning ( n -- )
    ['] some-warning stderr outfile-execute ;
@end example

After @code{some-warning} is executed, the original output direction is
restored; this construct is safe against exceptions.  Similarly, there is
@code{infile-execute} for redirecting the input of @code{key} and its users
(any input word that does not take a file explicitly).

@findex outfile-execute ( @var{ ... xt file-id -- ...   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{outfile-execute}
@kindex outfile-execute
@format
@code{outfile-execute} ( @i{... xt file-id -- ...  }) gforth-0.7 ``outfile-execute''
@end format
execute @i{xt} with the output of @code{type} etc. redirected to
@i{file-id}.


@findex outfile-id ( @var{ -- file-id   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{outfile-id}
@kindex outfile-id
@format
@code{outfile-id} ( @i{-- file-id  }) gforth-0.2 ``outfile-id''
@end format
@i{File-id} is used by @code{emit}, @code{type}, and any output word that
does not take a file-id as input.  By default @code{outfile-id} produces the
process's @code{stdout}, unless changed with @code{outfile-execute}.


@findex infile-execute ( @var{ ... xt file-id -- ...   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{infile-execute}
@kindex infile-execute
@format
@code{infile-execute} ( @i{... xt file-id -- ...  }) gforth-0.7 ``infile-execute''
@end format
execute @i{xt} with the input of @code{key} etc. redirected to @i{file-id}.


@findex infile-id ( @var{ -- file-id   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{infile-id}
@kindex infile-id
@format
@code{infile-id} ( @i{-- file-id  }) gforth-0.4 ``infile-id''
@end format
@i{File-id} is used by @code{key}, @code{?key}, and anything that refers to
the "user input device".  By default @code{infile-id} produces the process's
@code{stdin}, unless changed with @code{infile-execute}.



If you do not want to redirect the input or output to a file, you can also
make use of the fact that @code{key}, @code{emit} and @code{type} are
deferred words (@pxref{Deferred Words}).  However, in that case you have to
worry about the restoration and the protection against exceptions yourself;
also, note that for redirecting the output in this way, you have to redirect
both @code{emit} and @code{type}.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------
@node Directories, Search Paths, Redirection, Files
@subsection Directories
@cindex Directories

You can split a file name into a directory and base component:

@findex basename ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{basename}
@kindex basename
@format
@code{basename} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2  }) gforth-0.7 ``basename''
@end format
Given a file name @i{c-addr1 u1}, @i{c-addr2 u2} is the part of it with any
leading directory components removed.


@findex dirname ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr1 u2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{dirname}
@kindex dirname
@format
@code{dirname} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr1 u2  }) gforth-0.7 ``dirname''
@end format
@i{C-addr1 u2} is the directory name of the file name @i{c-addr1 u1},
including the final @code{/}.  If @i{caddr1 u1} does not contain a @code{/},
@i{u2}=0.



You can open and read directories similar to files.  Reading gives you one
directory entry at a time; you can match that to a filename (with
wildcards).

@findex open-dir ( @var{ c-addr u -- wdirid wior  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{open-dir}
@kindex open-dir
@format
@code{open-dir} ( @i{c-addr u -- wdirid wior }) gforth-0.5 ``open-dir''
@end format
Open the directory specified by @i{c-addr, u} and return @i{dir-id} for
futher access to it.

@findex read-dir ( @var{ c-addr u1 wdirid -- u2 flag wior  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{read-dir}
@kindex read-dir
@format
@code{read-dir} ( @i{c-addr u1 wdirid -- u2 flag wior }) gforth-0.5 ``read-dir''
@end format
Attempt to read the next entry from the directory specified by @i{dir-id} to
the buffer of length @i{u1} at address @i{c-addr}.  If the attempt fails
because there is no more entries, @i{ior}=0, @i{flag}=0, @i{u2}=0, and the
buffer is unmodified.  If the attempt to read the next entry fails because
of any other reason, return @i{ior}<>0.  If the attempt succeeds, store file
name to the buffer at @i{c-addr} and return @i{ior}=0, @i{flag}=true and
@i{u2} equal to the size of the file name.  If the length of the file name
is greater than @i{u1}, store first @i{u1} characters from file name into
the buffer and indicate "name too long" with @i{ior}, @i{flag}=true, and
@i{u2}=@i{u1}.

@findex close-dir ( @var{ wdirid -- wior  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{close-dir}
@kindex close-dir
@format
@code{close-dir} ( @i{wdirid -- wior }) gforth-0.5 ``close-dir''
@end format
Close the directory specified by @i{dir-id}.

@findex filename-match ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- flag  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{filename-match}
@kindex filename-match
@format
@code{filename-match} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 c-addr2 u2 -- flag }) gforth-0.5 ``match-file''
@end format
match the file name @var{c_addr1 u1} with the pattern @var{c_addr2 u2}.
Patterns match char by char except for the special characters '*' and '?',
which are wildcards for several ('*') or one ('?') character.

@findex get-dir ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{get-dir}
@kindex get-dir
@format
@code{get-dir} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2 }) gforth-0.7 ``get-dir''
@end format
Store the current directory in the buffer specified by @i{c-addr1, u1}.  If
the buffer size is not sufficient, return 0 0

@findex set-dir ( @var{ c-addr u -- wior  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{set-dir}
@kindex set-dir
@format
@code{set-dir} ( @i{c-addr u -- wior }) gforth-0.7 ``set-dir''
@end format
Change the current directory to @i{c-addr, u}.  Return an error if this is
not possible

@findex =mkdir ( @var{ c-addr u wmode -- wior  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{=mkdir}
@kindex =mkdir
@format
@code{=mkdir} ( @i{c-addr u wmode -- wior }) gforth-0.7 ``equals-mkdir''
@end format
Create directory @i{c-addr u} with mode @i{wmode}.

@findex mkdir-parents ( @var{ c-addr u mode -- ior   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{mkdir-parents}
@kindex mkdir-parents
@format
@code{mkdir-parents} ( @i{c-addr u mode -- ior  }) gforth-0.7 ``mkdir-parents''
@end format
create the directory @i{c-addr u} and all its parents with mode @i{mode}
(modified by umask)



@c ---------------------------------------------------------
@node Search Paths, , Directories, Files
@subsection Search Paths
@cindex path for @code{included}
@cindex file search path
@cindex @code{include} search path
@cindex search path for files

If you specify an absolute filename (i.e., a filename starting with @file{/}
or @file{~}, or with @file{:} in the second position (as in @samp{C:...}))
for @code{included} and friends, that file is included just as you would
expect.

If the filename starts with @file{./}, this refers to the directory that the
present file was @code{included} from.  This allows files to include other
files relative to their own position (irrespective of the current working
directory or the absolute position).  This feature is essential for
libraries consisting of several files, where a file may include other files
from the library.  It corresponds to @code{#include "..."} in C. If the
current input source is not a file, @file{.} refers to the directory of the
innermost file being included, or, if there is no file being included, to
the current working directory.

For relative filenames (not starting with @file{./}), Gforth uses a search
path similar to Forth's search order (@pxref{Word Lists}). It tries to find
the given filename in the directories present in the path, and includes the
first one it finds. There are separate search paths for Forth source files
and general files.  If the search path contains the directory @file{.}, this
refers to the directory of the current file, or the working directory, as if
the file had been specified with @file{./}.

Use @file{~+} to refer to the current working directory (as in the
@code{bash}).

@findex absolute-file? ( @var{ addr u -- flag   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{absolute-file?}
@kindex absolute-file?
@format
@code{absolute-file?} ( @i{addr u -- flag  }) gforth-1.0 ``absolute-file?''
@end format
A filename is absolute if it starts with a / or a ~ (~ expansion), or if it
is in the form ./*, extended regexp: ^[/~]|./, or if it has a colon as
second character ("C:...").  Paths simply containing a / are not absolute!



@c anton: fold the following subsubsections into this subsection?

@menu
* Source Search Paths::
* General Search Paths::     
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------
@node Source Search Paths, General Search Paths, Search Paths, Search Paths
@subsubsection Source Search Paths
@cindex search path control, source files

The search path is initialized when you start Gforth (@pxref{Invoking
Gforth}). You can display it and change it using @code{fpath} in combination
with the general path handling words.

@findex fpath ( @var{ -- path-addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{fpath}
@kindex fpath
@format
@code{fpath} ( @i{-- path-addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``fpath''
@end format

@findex .fpath ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{.fpath}
@kindex .fpath
@format
@code{.fpath} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.4 ``.fpath''
@end format
Display the contents of the Forth search path.


@findex file>fpath ( @var{ addr1 u1 -- addr2 u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{file>fpath}
@kindex file>fpath
@format
@code{file>fpath} ( @i{addr1 u1 -- addr2 u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``file>fpath''
@end format
Searches for a file with the name @i{c-addr1 u1} in the @code{fpath}.  If
successful, @i{c-addr u2} is the absolute file name or the file name
relative to the current working directory.  Throws an exception if the file
cannot be opened.


@c the functionality of the following words is easily available through
@c   fpath and the general path words.  The may go away.
@c doc-fpath+
@c doc-fpath=
@c doc-open-fpath-file

@noindent
Here is an example of using @code{fpath} and @code{require}:

@example
fpath path= /usr/lib/forth/|./
require timer.fs
@end example


@c ---------------------------------------------------------
@node General Search Paths, , Source Search Paths, Search Paths
@subsubsection General Search Paths
@cindex search path control, source files

Your application may need to search files in several directories, like
@code{included} does. To facilitate this, Gforth allows you to define and
use your own search paths, by providing generic equivalents of the Forth
search path words:

@findex open-path-file ( @var{ addr1 u1 path-addr -- wfileid addr2 u2 0 | ior   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{open-path-file}
@kindex open-path-file
@format
@code{open-path-file} ( @i{addr1 u1 path-addr -- wfileid addr2 u2 0 | ior  }) gforth-0.2 ``open-path-file''
@end format
Look in path @var{path-addr} for the file specified by @var{addr1 u1}.  If
found, the resulting path and an (read-only) open file descriptor are
returned. If the file is not found, @var{ior} is what came back from the
last attempt at opening the file (in the current implementation).


@findex file>path ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 path-addr -- c-addr2 u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{file>path}
@kindex file>path
@format
@code{file>path} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 path-addr -- c-addr2 u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``file>path''
@end format
Searches for a file with the name @i{c-addr1 u1} in path stored in
@i{path-addr}.  If successful, @i{c-addr u2} is the absolute file name or
the file name relative to the current working directory.  Throws an
exception if the file cannot be opened.


@findex clear-path ( @var{ path-addr --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{clear-path}
@kindex clear-path
@format
@code{clear-path} ( @i{path-addr --  }) gforth-0.5 ``clear-path''
@end format
Set the path @i{path-addr} to empty.


@findex also-path ( @var{ c-addr len path-addr --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{also-path}
@kindex also-path
@format
@code{also-path} ( @i{c-addr len path-addr --  }) gforth-0.4 ``also-path''
@end format
add the directory @i{c-addr len} to @i{path-addr}.


@findex .path ( @var{ path-addr --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{.path}
@kindex .path
@format
@code{.path} ( @i{path-addr --  }) gforth-0.4 ``.path''
@end format
Display the contents of the search path @var{path-addr}.


@findex path+ ( @var{ path-addr  "dir" --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{path+}
@kindex path+
@format
@code{path+} ( @i{path-addr  "dir" --  }) gforth-0.4 ``path+''
@end format
Add the directory @var{dir} to the search path @var{path-addr}.


@findex path= ( @var{ path-addr "dir1|dir2|dir3" --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{path=}
@kindex path=
@format
@code{path=} ( @i{path-addr "dir1|dir2|dir3" --  }) gforth-0.4 ``path-equals''
@end format
Make a complete new search path; the path separator is |.



@c
Here's an example of creating a custom search path:
@example
variable mypath \ no special allocation required, just a variable
mypath path= /lib|/usr/lib \ assign initial directories
mypath path+ /usr/local/lib \ append directory
mypath .path \ output:"/lib /usr/lib /usr/local/lib"
@end example

Search file and show resulting path:
@example
s" libm.so" mypath open-path-file throw type close-file \ output:"/lib/libm.so"
@end example

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Blocks, Other I/O, Files, Words
@section Blocks
@cindex I/O - blocks
@cindex blocks

When you run Gforth on a modern desk-top computer, it runs under the control
of an operating system which provides certain services.  One of these
services is @var{file services}, which allows Forth source code and data to
be stored in files and read into Gforth (@pxref{Files}).

Traditionally, Forth has been an important programming language on systems
where it has interfaced directly to the underlying hardware with no
intervening operating system. Forth provides a mechanism, called
@dfn{blocks}, for accessing mass storage on such systems.

A block is a 1024-byte data area, which can be used to hold data or Forth
source code. No structure is imposed on the contents of the block. A block
is identified by its number; blocks are numbered contiguously from 1 to an
implementation-defined maximum.

A typical system that used blocks but no operating system might use a single
floppy-disk drive for mass storage, with the disks formatted to provide
256-byte sectors. Blocks would be implemented by assigning the first four
sectors of the disk to block 1, the second four sectors to block 2 and so
on, up to the limit of the capacity of the disk. The disk would not contain
any file system information, just the set of blocks.

@cindex blocks file
On systems that do provide file services, blocks are typically implemented
by storing a sequence of blocks within a single @dfn{blocks file}.  The size
of the blocks file will be an exact multiple of 1024 bytes, corresponding to
the number of blocks it contains. This is the mechanism that Gforth uses.

@cindex @file{blocks.fb}
Only one blocks file can be open at a time. If you use block words without
having specified a blocks file, Gforth defaults to the blocks file
@file{blocks.fb}. Gforth uses the Forth search path when attempting to
locate a blocks file (@pxref{Source Search Paths}).

@cindex block buffers
When you read and write blocks under program control, Gforth uses a number
of @dfn{block buffers} as intermediate storage. These buffers are not used
when you use @code{load} to interpret the contents of a block.

The behaviour of the block buffers is analagous to that of a cache.  Each
block buffer has three states:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Unassigned
@item
Assigned-clean
@item
Assigned-dirty
@end itemize

Initially, all block buffers are @i{unassigned}. In order to access a block,
the block (specified by its block number) must be assigned to a block
buffer.

The assignment of a block to a block buffer is performed by @code{block} or
@code{buffer}. Use @code{block} when you wish to modify the existing
contents of a block. Use @code{buffer} when you don't care about the
existing contents of the block@footnote{The Standard Forth definition of
@code{buffer} is intended not to cause disk I/O; if the data associated with
the particular block is already stored in a block buffer due to an earlier
@code{block} command, @code{buffer} will return that block buffer and the
existing contents of the block will be available. Otherwise, @code{buffer}
will simply assign a new, empty block buffer for the block.}.

Once a block has been assigned to a block buffer using @code{block} or
@code{buffer}, that block buffer becomes the @i{current block buffer}. Data
may only be manipulated (read or written) within the current block buffer.

When the contents of the current block buffer has been modified it is
necessary, @emph{before calling @code{block} or @code{buffer} again}, to
either abandon the changes (by doing nothing) or mark the block as changed
(assigned-dirty), using @code{update}. Using @code{update} does not change
the blocks file; it simply changes a block buffer's state to
@i{assigned-dirty}.  The block will be written implicitly when it's buffer
is needed for another block, or explicitly by @code{flush} or
@code{save-buffers}.

word @code{Flush} writes all @i{assigned-dirty} blocks back to the blocks
file on disk. Leaving Gforth with @code{bye} also performs a @code{flush}.

In Gforth, @code{block} and @code{buffer} use a @i{direct-mapped} algorithm
to assign a block buffer to a block. That means that any particular block
can only be assigned to one specific block buffer, called (for the
particular operation) the @i{victim buffer}. If the victim buffer is
@i{unassigned} or @i{assigned-clean} it is allocated to the new block
immediately. If it is @i{assigned-dirty} its current contents are written
back to the blocks file on disk before it is allocated to the new block.

Although no structure is imposed on the contents of a block, it is
traditional to display the contents as 16 lines each of 64 characters.  A
block provides a single, continuous stream of input (for example, it acts as
a single parse area) -- there are no end-of-line characters within a block,
and no end-of-file character at the end of a block. There are two
consequences of this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The last character of one line wraps straight into the first character of
the following line
@item
The word @code{\} -- comment to end of line -- requires special treatment;
in the context of a block it causes all characters until the end of the
current 64-character ``line'' to be ignored.
@end itemize

In Gforth, when you use @code{block} with a non-existent block number, the
current blocks file will be extended to the appropriate size and the block
buffer will be initialised with spaces.

Gforth includes a simple block editor (type @code{use blocked.fb 0 list} for
details) but doesn't encourage the use of blocks; the mechanism is only
provided for backward compatibility.

Common techniques that are used when working with blocks include:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A screen editor that allows you to edit blocks without leaving the Forth
environment.
@item
Shadow screens; where every code block has an associated block containing
comments (for example: code in odd block numbers, comments in even block
numbers). Typically, the block editor provides a convenient mechanism to
toggle between code and comments.
@item
Load blocks; a single block (typically block 1) contains a number of
@code{thru} commands which @code{load} the whole of the application.
@end itemize

See Frank Sergeant's Pygmy Forth to see just how well blocks can be
integrated into a Forth programming environment.

@comment TODO what about errors on open-blocks?

@findex open-blocks ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{open-blocks}
@kindex open-blocks
@format
@code{open-blocks} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``open-blocks''
@end format
Use the file, whose name is given by @i{c-addr u}, as the blocks file.


@findex use ( @var{ "file" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{use}
@kindex use
@format
@code{use} ( @i{"file" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``use''
@end format
Use @i{file} as the blocks file.


@findex block-offset ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{block-offset}
@kindex block-offset
@format
@code{block-offset} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.5 ``block-offset''
@end format
User variable containing the number of the first block (default since 0.5.0:
0).  Block files created with Gforth versions before 0.5.0 have the offset
1.  If you use these files you can: @code{1 offset !}; or add 1 to every
block number used; or prepend 1024 characters to the file.


@findex get-block-fid ( @var{ -- wfileid   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{get-block-fid}
@kindex get-block-fid
@format
@code{get-block-fid} ( @i{-- wfileid  }) gforth-0.2 ``get-block-fid''
@end format
Return the file-id of the current blocks file. If no blocks file has been
opened, use @file{blocks.fb} as the default blocks file.


@findex block-position ( @var{ u --   } ) block
@cindex @code{block-position}
@kindex block-position
@format
@code{block-position} ( @i{u --  }) block ``block-position''
@end format
Position the block file to the start of block @i{u}.



@findex list ( @var{ u --   } ) block-ext
@cindex @code{list}
@kindex list
@format
@code{list} ( @i{u --  }) block-ext ``list''
@end format
Display block @i{u}. In Gforth, the block is displayed as 16 numbered lines,
each of 64 characters.


@findex scr ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) block-ext
@cindex @code{scr}
@kindex scr
@format
@code{scr} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) block-ext ``s-c-r''
@end format
@code{User} variable containing the block number of the block most recently
processed by @code{list}.



@findex block ( @var{ u -- a-addr   } ) block
@cindex @code{block}
@kindex block
@format
@code{block} ( @i{u -- a-addr  }) block ``block''
@end format
If a block buffer is assigned for block @i{u}, return its start address,
@i{a-addr}. Otherwise, assign a block buffer for block @i{u} (if the
assigned block buffer has been @code{update}d, transfer the contents to mass
storage), read the block into the block buffer and return its start address,
@i{a-addr}.


@findex buffer ( @var{ u -- a-addr   } ) block
@cindex @code{buffer}
@kindex buffer
@format
@code{buffer} ( @i{u -- a-addr  }) block ``buffer''
@end format
If a block buffer is assigned for block @i{u}, return its start address,
@i{a-addr}. Otherwise, assign a block buffer for block @i{u} (if the
assigned block buffer has been @code{update}d, transfer the contents to mass
storage) and return its start address, @i{a-addr}.  The subtle difference
between @code{buffer} and @code{block} mean that you should only use
@code{buffer} if you don't care about the previous contents of block
@i{u}. In Gforth, this simply calls @code{block}.



@findex empty-buffers ( @var{ --   } ) block-ext
@cindex @code{empty-buffers}
@kindex empty-buffers
@format
@code{empty-buffers} ( @i{--  }) block-ext ``empty-buffers''
@end format
Mark all block buffers as unassigned; if any had been marked as
assigned-dirty (by @code{update}), the changes to those blocks will be lost.


@findex empty-buffer ( @var{ buffer --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{empty-buffer}
@kindex empty-buffer
@format
@code{empty-buffer} ( @i{buffer --  }) gforth-0.2 ``empty-buffer''
@end format

@findex update ( @var{ --   } ) block
@cindex @code{update}
@kindex update
@format
@code{update} ( @i{--  }) block ``update''
@end format
Mark the state of the current block buffer as assigned-dirty.


@findex updated? ( @var{ n -- f   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{updated?}
@kindex updated?
@format
@code{updated?} ( @i{n -- f  }) gforth-0.2 ``updated?''
@end format
Return true if @code{updated} has been used to mark block @i{n} as
assigned-dirty.


@findex save-buffers ( @var{ --   } ) block
@cindex @code{save-buffers}
@kindex save-buffers
@format
@code{save-buffers} ( @i{--  }) block ``save-buffers''
@end format
Transfer the contents of each @code{update}d block buffer to mass storage,
then mark all block buffers as assigned-clean.


@findex save-buffer ( @var{ buffer --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{save-buffer}
@kindex save-buffer
@format
@code{save-buffer} ( @i{buffer --  }) gforth-0.2 ``save-buffer''
@end format

@findex flush ( @var{ --   } ) block
@cindex @code{flush}
@kindex flush
@format
@code{flush} ( @i{--  }) block ``flush''
@end format
Perform the functions of @code{save-buffers} then @code{empty-buffers}.



@findex load ( @var{ i*x u -- j*x   } ) block
@cindex @code{load}
@kindex load
@format
@code{load} ( @i{i*x u -- j*x  }) block ``load''
@end format
Text-interpret block @i{u}.  Block 0 cannot be @code{load}ed.


@findex thru ( @var{ i*x n1 n2 -- j*x   } ) block-ext
@cindex @code{thru}
@kindex thru
@format
@code{thru} ( @i{i*x n1 n2 -- j*x  }) block-ext ``thru''
@end format
@code{load} the blocks @i{n1} through @i{n2} in sequence.


@findex +load ( @var{ i*x n -- j*x   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{+load}
@kindex +load
@format
@code{+load} ( @i{i*x n -- j*x  }) gforth-0.2 ``+load''
@end format
Used within a block to load the block specified as the current block +
@i{n}.


@findex +thru ( @var{ i*x n1 n2 -- j*x   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{+thru}
@kindex +thru
@format
@code{+thru} ( @i{i*x n1 n2 -- j*x  }) gforth-0.2 ``+thru''
@end format
Used within a block to load the range of blocks specified as the current
block + @i{n1} thru the current block + @i{n2}.


@findex --> ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{-->}
@kindex -->
@format
@code{-->} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``chain''
@end format
If this symbol is encountered whilst loading block @i{n}, discard the
remainder of the block and load block @i{n+1}. Used for chaining multiple
blocks together as a single loadable unit.  Not recommended, because it
destroys the independence of loading.  Use @code{thru} (which is standard)
or @code{+thru} instead.


@findex block-included ( @var{ a-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{block-included}
@kindex block-included
@format
@code{block-included} ( @i{a-addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``block-included''
@end format
Use within a block that is to be processed by @code{load}. Save the current
blocks file specification, open the blocks file specified by @i{a-addr u}
and @code{load} block 1 from that file (which may in turn chain or load
other blocks). Finally, close the blocks file and restore the original
blocks file.




@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other I/O, OS command line arguments, Blocks, Words
@section Other I/O
@cindex I/O - keyboard and display

@menu
* Simple numeric output::    定義済みの書式
* Formatted numeric output::  書式化された(目に見える)出力
* Floating-point output::
* Miscellaneous output::
* Displaying characters and strings::  その他もろもろ
* Terminal output::          カーソル移動等
* Single-key input::
* Line input and conversion::
* Pipes::                    あなた独自のパイプラインの作り方
* Xchars and Unicode::       非ASCII文字
* i18n and l10n::            国際化(I18n)とローカライズ
* Substitute::               テキストマクロ置換
* CSV Reader::               データ・インポート機能
@end menu

@node Simple numeric output, Formatted numeric output, Other I/O, Other I/O
@subsection Simple numeric output
@cindex numeric output - simple/free-format

The simplest output functions are those that display numbers from the data
stack.  Numbers are displayed in the base (aka radix) stored in @code{base}
(@pxref{Number Conversion}).

@findex . ( @var{ n --   } ) core
@cindex @code{.}
@kindex .
@format
@code{.} ( @i{n --  }) core ``dot''
@end format
Display (the signed single number) @var{n} in free-format, followed by a
space.


@findex dec. ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dec.}
@kindex dec.
@format
@code{dec.} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``dec.''
@end format
Display @i{n} as a signed decimal number, followed by a space.


@findex h. ( @var{ u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{h.}
@kindex h.
@format
@code{h.} ( @i{u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``h.''
@end format
Display @i{u} as an unsigned hex number, prefixed with a "$" and followed by
a space.


@findex hex. ( @var{ u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{hex.}
@kindex hex.
@format
@code{hex.} ( @i{u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``hex.''
@end format
Display @i{u} as an unsigned hex number, prefixed with a @code{$} and
followed by a space.  Another name for this word is @code{h.}, which is
present in several other systems, but not in Gforth before 1.0.


@findex u. ( @var{ u --   } ) core
@cindex @code{u.}
@kindex u.
@format
@code{u.} ( @i{u --  }) core ``u-dot''
@end format
Display (the unsigned single number) @var{u} in free-format, followed by a
space.


@findex .r ( @var{ n1 n2 --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{.r}
@kindex .r
@format
@code{.r} ( @i{n1 n2 --  }) core-ext ``dot-r''
@end format
Display @var{n1} right-aligned in a field @var{n2} characters wide. If more
than @var{n2} characters are needed to display the number, all digits are
displayed.  If appropriate, @var{n2} must include a character for a leading
``-''.


@findex u.r ( @var{ u n --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{u.r}
@kindex u.r
@format
@code{u.r} ( @i{u n --  }) core-ext ``u-dot-r''
@end format
Display @var{u} right-aligned in a field @var{n} characters wide. If more
than @var{n} characters are needed to display the number, all digits are
displayed.


@findex dec.r ( @var{ u n --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{dec.r}
@kindex dec.r
@format
@code{dec.r} ( @i{u n --  }) gforth-0.5 ``dec.r''
@end format
Display @i{u} as a unsigned decimal number in a field @i{n} characters wide.


@findex d. ( @var{ d --   } ) double
@cindex @code{d.}
@kindex d.
@format
@code{d.} ( @i{d --  }) double ``d-dot''
@end format
Display (the signed double number) @var{d} in free-format. followed by a
space.


@findex ud. ( @var{ ud --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ud.}
@kindex ud.
@format
@code{ud.} ( @i{ud --  }) gforth-0.2 ``u-d-dot''
@end format
Display (the signed double number) @var{ud} in free-format, followed by a
space.


@findex d.r ( @var{ d n --   } ) double
@cindex @code{d.r}
@kindex d.r
@format
@code{d.r} ( @i{d n --  }) double ``d-dot-r''
@end format
Display @var{d} right-aligned in a field @var{n} characters wide. If more
than @var{n} characters are needed to display the number, all digits are
displayed.  If appropriate, @var{n} must include a character for a leading
``-''.


@findex ud.r ( @var{ ud n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ud.r}
@kindex ud.r
@format
@code{ud.r} ( @i{ud n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``u-d-dot-r''
@end format
Display @var{ud} right-aligned in a field @var{n} characters wide. If more
than @var{n} characters are needed to display the number, all digits are
displayed.




@node Formatted numeric output, Floating-point output, Simple numeric output, Other I/O
@subsection Formatted numeric output
@cindex formatted numeric output
@cindex pictured numeric output
@cindex numeric output - formatted

Forth traditionally uses a technique called @dfn{pictured numeric output}
for formatted printing of integers.  In this technique, digits are extracted
from the number (using the current output radix defined by @code{base},
@pxref{Number Conversion}), converted to ASCII codes and prepended to a
string that is built in a scratch-pad area of memory (@pxref{core-idef,
Implementation-defined options, Implementation-defined options}). Arbitrary
characters can be prepended to the string during the extraction process. The
completed string is specified by an address and length and can be
manipulated (@code{TYPE}ed, copied, modified) under program control.

All of the integer output words described in the previous section
(@pxref{Simple numeric output}) are implemented in Gforth using pictured
numeric output.

Three important things to remember about pictured numeric output:

@itemize @bullet
@item
It always operates on double-precision numbers; to display a
single-precision number, convert it first (for ways of doing this
@pxref{Double precision}).
@item
It always treats the double-precision number as though it were unsigned. The
examples below show ways of printing signed numbers.
@item
The string is built up from right to left; least significant digit first.
@end itemize

Standard Forth supports a single output buffer (aka hold area) that you
empty and initialize with @code{<#} and for which you get the result string
with @code{#>}.

Gforth additionally supports nested usage of this buffer, allowing, e.g., to
nest output from the debugging tracer @code{~~} inside code dealing with the
hold area: @code{<<#} starts a new nest, @code{#>} produces the result
string, and @code{#>>} unnests: the hold area for the nest is reclaimed, and
@code{#>} now produces the string for the next-outer nest.  All of Gforth's
higher-level numeric output words use @code{<<#} ... @code{#>}
... @code{#>>} and can be nested inside other users of the hold area.

@findex <# ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{<#}
@kindex <#
@format
@code{<#} ( @i{--  }) core ``less-number-sign''
@end format
Initialise/clear the pictured numeric output string.


@findex <<# ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{<<#}
@kindex <<#
@format
@code{<<#} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.5 ``less-less-number-sign''
@end format
Start a hold area that ends with @code{#>>}. Can be nested in each other and
in @code{<#}.  Note: if you do not match up the @code{<<#}s with
@code{#>>}s, you will eventually run out of hold area; you can reset the
hold area to empty with @code{<#}.


@findex # ( @var{ ud1 -- ud2   } ) core
@cindex @code{#}
@kindex #
@format
@code{#} ( @i{ud1 -- ud2  }) core ``number-sign''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}. Prepend the least-significant digit
(according to @code{base}) of @var{ud1} to the pictured numeric output
string.  @var{ud2} is @var{ud1/base}, i.e., the number representing the
remaining digits.


@findex #s ( @var{ ud -- 0 0   } ) core
@cindex @code{#s}
@kindex #s
@format
@code{#s} ( @i{ud -- 0 0  }) core ``number-sign-s''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}.  Prepend all digits of @var{ud} to
the pictured numeric output string.  @code{#s} will convert at least one
digit. Therefore, if @var{ud} is 0, @code{#s} will prepend a ``0'' to the
pictured numeric output string.


@findex hold ( @var{ char --   } ) core
@cindex @code{hold}
@kindex hold
@format
@code{hold} ( @i{char --  }) core ``hold''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}. Prepend the character @var{char} to
the pictured numeric output string.


@findex holds ( @var{ addr u --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{holds}
@kindex holds
@format
@code{holds} ( @i{addr u --  }) core-ext ``holds''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}. Prepend the string @code{addr u} to
the pictured numeric output string.


@findex sign ( @var{ n --   } ) core
@cindex @code{sign}
@kindex sign
@format
@code{sign} ( @i{n --  }) core ``sign''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}. If @var{n} (a @var{single} number) is
negative, prepend ``@code{-}'' to the pictured numeric output string.


@findex #> ( @var{ xd -- addr u   } ) core
@cindex @code{#>}
@kindex #>
@format
@code{#>} ( @i{xd -- addr u  }) core ``number-sign-greater''
@end format
Complete the pictured numeric output string by discarding @var{xd} and
returning @var{addr u}; the address and length of the formatted string. A
Standard program may modify characters within the string.  Does not release
the hold area; use @code{#>>} to release a hold area started with
@code{<<#}, or @code{<#} to release all hold areas.


@findex #>> ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{#>>}
@kindex #>>
@format
@code{#>>} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.5 ``number-sign-greater-greater''
@end format
Release the hold area started with @code{<<#}.



@noindent
Here are some examples of using pictured numeric output:

@example
: my-u. ( u -- )
  \ Simplest use of pns.. behaves like Standard u. 
  0              \ convert to unsigned double
  <<#            \ start conversion
  #s             \ convert all digits
  #>             \ complete conversion
  TYPE SPACE     \ display, with trailing space
  #>> ;          \ release hold area

: cents-only ( u -- )
  0              \ convert to unsigned double
  <<#            \ start conversion
  # #            \ convert two least-significant digits
  #>             \ complete conversion, discard other digits
  TYPE SPACE     \ display, with trailing space
  #>> ;          \ release hold area

: dollars-and-cents ( u -- )
  0              \ convert to unsigned double
  <<#            \ start conversion
  # #            \ convert two least-significant digits
  '.' hold       \ insert decimal point
  #s             \ convert remaining digits
  '$' hold       \ append currency symbol
  #>             \ complete conversion
  TYPE SPACE     \ display, with trailing space
  #>> ;          \ release hold area

: my-. ( n -- )
  \ handling negatives.. behaves like Standard .
  s>d            \ convert to signed double
  swap over dabs \ leave sign byte followed by unsigned double
  <<#            \ start conversion
  #s             \ convert all digits
  rot sign       \ get at sign byte, append "-" if needed
  #>             \ complete conversion
  TYPE SPACE     \ display, with trailing space
  #>> ;          \ release hold area

: account. ( n -- )
  \ accountants don't like minus signs, they use parentheses
  \ for negative numbers
  s>d            \ convert to signed double
  swap over dabs \ leave sign byte followed by unsigned double
  <<#            \ start conversion
  2 pick         \ get copy of sign byte
  0< IF ')' hold THEN \ right-most character of output
  #s             \ convert all digits
  rot            \ get at sign byte
  0< IF '(' hold THEN
  #>             \ complete conversion
  TYPE SPACE     \ display, with trailing space
  #>> ;          \ release hold area

@end example

Here are some examples of using these words:

@example
1 my-u. 1
hex -1 my-u. decimal FFFFFFFF
1 cents-only 01
1234 cents-only 34
2 dollars-and-cents $0.02
1234 dollars-and-cents $12.34
123 my-. 123
-123 my. -123
123 account. 123
-456 account. (456)
@end example

@node Floating-point output, Miscellaneous output, Formatted numeric output, Other I/O
@subsection Floating-point output
@cindex numeric output, FP
@cindex FP output
@cindex floating-point output

Floating-point output is always displayed using base 10.

@findex f. ( @var{ r --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{f.}
@kindex f.
@format
@code{f.} ( @i{r --  }) floating-ext ``f-dot''
@end format
Display (the floating-point number) @i{r} without exponent, followed by a
space.


@findex fe. ( @var{ r --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fe.}
@kindex fe.
@format
@code{fe.} ( @i{r --  }) floating-ext ``f-e-dot''
@end format
Display @i{r} using engineering notation (with exponent dividable by 3),
followed by a space.


@findex fs. ( @var{ r --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fs.}
@kindex fs.
@format
@code{fs.} ( @i{r --  }) floating-ext ``f-s-dot''
@end format
Display @i{r} using scientific notation (with exponent), followed by a
space.


@findex fp. ( @var{ r --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{fp.}
@kindex fp.
@format
@code{fp.} ( @i{r --  }) floating-ext ``f-e-dot''
@end format
Display @i{r} using SI prefix notation (with exponent dividable by 3,
converted into SI prefixes if available), followed by a space.



Examples of printing the number 1234.5678E23 in the different floating-point
output formats are shown below.

@example
f. 123456780000000000000000000.
fe. 123.456780000000E24
fs. 1.23456780000000E26
fp. 123.456780000000Y
@end example

The length of the output is influenced by:

@findex precision ( @var{ -- u   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{precision}
@kindex precision
@format
@code{precision} ( @i{-- u  }) floating-ext ``precision''
@end format
@i{u} is the number of significant digits currently used by @code{F.}
@code{FE.} and @code{FS.} 


@findex set-precision ( @var{ u --   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{set-precision}
@kindex set-precision
@format
@code{set-precision} ( @i{u --  }) floating-ext ``set-precision''
@end format
Set the number of significant digits currently used by @code{F.} @code{FE.}
and @code{FS.} to @i{u}.



You can control the output in more detail with:

@findex f.rdp ( @var{ rf +nr +nd +np --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{f.rdp}
@kindex f.rdp
@format
@code{f.rdp} ( @i{rf +nr +nd +np --  }) gforth-0.6 ``f.rdp''
@end format
Print float @i{rf} formatted.  The total width of the output is @i{nr}.  For
fixed-point notation, the number of digits after the decimal point is
@i{+nd} and the minimum number of significant digits is @i{np}.
@code{Set-precision} has no effect on @code{f.rdp}.  Fixed-point notation is
used if the number of siginicant digits would be at least @i{np} and if the
number of digits before the decimal point would fit.  If fixed-point
notation is not used, exponential notation is used, and if that does not
fit, asterisks are printed.  We recommend using @i{nr}>=7 to avoid the risk
of numbers not fitting at all.  We recommend @i{nr}>=@i{np}+5 to avoid cases
where @code{f.rdp} switches to exponential notation because fixed-point
notation would have too few significant digits, yet exponential notation
offers fewer significant digits.  We recommend @i{nr}>=@i{nd}+2, if you want
to have fixed-point notation for some numbers; the smaller the value of
@i{np}, the more cases are shown in fixed-point notation (cases where few or
no significant digits remain in fixed-point notation).  We recommend
@i{np}>@i{nr}, if you want to have exponential notation for all numbers.



To give you a better intuition of how they influence the output, here are
some examples of parameter combinations; in each line the same number is
printed, in each column the same parameter combination is used for printing:

@example
    12 13 0    7 3 4   7 3 0   7 3 1   7 5 1   7 7 1   7 0 2  4 2 1
|-1.234568E-6|-1.2E-6| -0.000|-1.2E-6|-1.2E-6|-1.2E-6|-1.2E-6|****|
|-1.234568E-5|-1.2E-5| -0.000|-1.2E-5|-.00001|-1.2E-5|-1.2E-5|****|
|-1.234568E-4|-1.2E-4| -0.000|-1.2E-4|-.00012|-1.2E-4|-1.2E-4|****|
|-1.234568E-3|-1.2E-3| -0.001| -0.001|-.00123|-1.2E-3|-1.2E-3|****|
|-1.234568E-2|-1.2E-2| -0.012| -0.012|-.01235|-1.2E-2|-1.2E-2|-.01|
|-1.234568E-1|-1.2E-1| -0.123| -0.123|-.12346|-1.2E-1|-1.2E-1|-.12|
|-1.2345679E0| -1.235| -1.235| -1.235|-1.23E0|-1.23E0|-1.23E0|-1E0|
|-1.2345679E1|-12.346|-12.346|-12.346|-1.23E1|-1.23E1|   -12.|-1E1|
|-1.2345679E2|-1.23E2|-1.23E2|-1.23E2|-1.23E2|-1.23E2|  -123.|-1E2|
|-1.2345679E3|-1.23E3|-1.23E3|-1.23E3|-1.23E3|-1.23E3| -1235.|-1E3|
|-1.2345679E4|-1.23E4|-1.23E4|-1.23E4|-1.23E4|-1.23E4|-12346.|-1E4|
|-1.2345679E5|-1.23E5|-1.23E5|-1.23E5|-1.23E5|-1.23E5|-1.23E5|-1E5|
@end example

You can generate a string instead of displaying the number with:

@findex f>str-rdp ( @var{ rf +nr +nd +np -- c-addr nr   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{f>str-rdp}
@kindex f>str-rdp
@format
@code{f>str-rdp} ( @i{rf +nr +nd +np -- c-addr nr  }) gforth-0.6 ``f>str-rdp''
@end format
Convert @i{rf} into a string at @i{c-addr nr}.  The conversion rules and the
meanings of @i{nr +nd np} are the same as for @code{f.rdp}.  The result in
in the pictured numeric output buffer and will be destroyed by anything
destroying that buffer.


@findex f>buf-rdp ( @var{ rf c-addr +nr +nd +np --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{f>buf-rdp}
@kindex f>buf-rdp
@format
@code{f>buf-rdp} ( @i{rf c-addr +nr +nd +np --  }) gforth-0.6 ``f>buf-rdp''
@end format
Convert @i{rf} into a string at @i{c-addr nr}.  The conversion rules and the
meanings of @i{nr nd np} are the same as for @code{f.rdp}.



There is also a primitive used for implementing higher-level FP-to-string
words:

@findex represent ( @var{ r c-addr u -- n f1 f2  } ) floating
@cindex @code{represent}
@kindex represent
@format
@code{represent} ( @i{r c-addr u -- n f1 f2 }) floating ``represent''
@end format
Convert the decimal significand (aka mantissa) of @i{r} into a string in
buffer @i{c-addr u}; @i{n} is the exponent, @i{f1} is true if @i{r} is
negative, and @i{f2} is true if @i{r} is valid (a finite number in Gforth).


@node Miscellaneous output, Displaying characters and strings, Floating-point output, Other I/O
@subsection Miscellaneous output


@findex cr ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{cr}
@kindex cr
@format
@code{cr} ( @i{--  }) core ``c-r''
@end format
Output a newline (of the favourite kind of the host OS).  Note that due to
the way the Forth command line interpreter inserts newlines, the preferred
way to use @code{cr} is at the start of a piece of text; e.g., @code{cr ."
hello, world"}.


@findex space ( @var{ --   } ) core
@cindex @code{space}
@kindex space
@format
@code{space} ( @i{--  }) core ``space''
@end format
Display one space.


@findex spaces ( @var{ u --   } ) core
@cindex @code{spaces}
@kindex spaces
@format
@code{spaces} ( @i{u --  }) core ``spaces''
@end format
Display @var{u} spaces. 


@findex out ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{out}
@kindex out
@format
@code{out} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-1.0 ``out''
@end format
@code{Addr} contains a number that tries to give the position of the cursor
within the current line on the user output device: It resets to 0 on
@code{cr}, increases by the number of characters by @code{type} and
@code{emit}, and decreases on @code{backspaces}.  Unfortunately, it does not
take into account tabs, multi-byte characters, or the existence of Unicode
characters with width 0 and 2, so it only works for simple cases.


@findex .\" ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{.\"}
@kindex .\"
@format
@code{.\"} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time --  }) gforth-0.6 ``dot-backslash-quote''
@end format
Like @code{."}, but translates C-like \-escape-sequences (see @code{S\"}).


@findex ." ( @var{ compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time --   } ) core
@cindex @code{."}
@kindex ."
@format
@code{."} ( @i{compilation 'ccc"' -- ; run-time --  }) core ``dot-quote''
@end format
Compilation: Parse a string @i{ccc} delimited by a " (double quote). At
run-time, display the string. Interpretation semantics for this word are
undefined in standard Forth. Gforth's interpretation semantics are to
display the string.


@findex .( ( @var{ compilation&interpretation "ccc<paren>" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{.(}
@kindex .(
@format
@code{.(} ( @i{compilation&interpretation "ccc<paren>" --  }) core-ext ``dot-paren''
@end format
Compilation and interpretation semantics: Parse a string @i{ccc} delimited
by a @code{)} (right parenthesis). Display the string. This is often used to
display progress information during compilation; see examples below.



If you don't want to worry about wether to use @code{.( hello)} or @code{."
hello"}, you can write @code{"hello" type}, which gives you what you usually
want (but is less portable to other Forth systems).

@noindent
As an example, consider the following text, stored in a file @file{test.fs}:

@example
.( text-1)
: my-word
  ." text-2" cr
  .( text-3)
  "text-4" type
;

." text-5"
"text-6" type
@end example

When you load this code into Gforth, the following output is generated:

@example
@kbd{include test.fs @key{RET}} text-1text-3text-5text-6 ok
@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item
Messages @code{text-1} and @code{text-3} are displayed because @code{.(} is
an immediate word; it behaves in the same way whether it is used inside or
outside a colon definition.
@item
Message @code{text-5} is displayed because of Gforth's added interpretation
semantics for @code{."}.
@item
Message @code{text-6} is displayed because @code{"text-6" type} is
interpreted.
@item
Message @code{text-2} is @i{not} displayed, because the text interpreter
performs the compilation semantics for @code{."} within the definition of
@code{my-word}.
@item
Message @code{text-4} is @i{not} displayed, because @code{"text-4" type} is
compiled into @code{my-word}.
@end itemize


@node Displaying characters and strings, Terminal output, Miscellaneous output, Other I/O
@subsection Displaying characters and strings
@cindex characters - displaying
@cindex character strings - displaying

@findex type ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) core
@cindex @code{type}
@kindex type
@format
@code{type} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) core ``type''
@end format
If @var{u}>0, display @var{u} characters from a string starting with the
character stored at @var{c-addr}.


@findex xemit ( @var{ xc --   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xemit}
@kindex xemit
@format
@code{xemit} ( @i{xc --  }) xchar ``x-emit''
@end format
Prints an xchar on the terminal.


@findex emit ( @var{ c --   } ) core
@cindex @code{emit}
@kindex emit
@format
@code{emit} ( @i{c --  }) core ``emit''
@end format
Send the byte @i{c} to the current output; for ASCII characters, @code{emit}
is equivalent to @code{xemit}.


@findex typewhite ( @var{ addr n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{typewhite}
@kindex typewhite
@format
@code{typewhite} ( @i{addr n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``typewhite''
@end format
Like type, but white space is printed instead of the characters.




@node Terminal output, Single-key input, Displaying characters and strings, Other I/O
@subsection Terminal output
@cindex output to terminal
@cindex terminal output

If you are outputting to a terminal, you may want to control the positioning
of the cursor:
@cindex cursor positioning

@findex at-xy ( @var{ x y --   } ) facility
@cindex @code{at-xy}
@kindex at-xy
@format
@code{at-xy} ( @i{x y --  }) facility ``at-x-y''
@end format
Put the curser at position @i{x y}.  The top left-hand corner of the display
is at 0 0.


@findex at-deltaxy ( @var{ dx dy --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{at-deltaxy}
@kindex at-deltaxy
@format
@code{at-deltaxy} ( @i{dx dy --  }) gforth-0.7 ``at-deltaxy''
@end format
With the current position at @i{x y}, put the cursor at @i{x+dx y+dy}.



In order to know where to position the cursor, it is often helpful to know
the size of the screen:
@cindex terminal size

@findex form ( @var{ -- nlines ncols   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{form}
@kindex form
@format
@code{form} ( @i{-- nlines ncols  }) gforth-0.2 ``form''
@end format


And sometimes you want to use:
@cindex clear screen

@findex page ( @var{ --   } ) facility
@cindex @code{page}
@kindex page
@format
@code{page} ( @i{--  }) facility ``page''
@end format
Clear the screen



Note that on non-terminals you should use @code{12 emit}, not @code{page},
to get a form feed.

@subsubsection Color output
The following words are used to create (semantic) colorful output; further
output is produced in the color and style given by the word; the actual
color and style depends on the theme (see below).

@findex default-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{default-color}
@kindex default-color
@format
@code{default-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``default-color''
@end format
use system-default color


@findex error-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{error-color}
@kindex error-color
@format
@code{error-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``error-color''
@end format
error color: red


@findex error-hl-inv ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{error-hl-inv}
@kindex error-hl-inv
@format
@code{error-hl-inv} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``error-hl-inv''
@end format
color mod for error highlight inverse


@findex error-hl-ul ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{error-hl-ul}
@kindex error-hl-ul
@format
@code{error-hl-ul} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``error-hl-ul''
@end format
color mod for error highlight underline


@findex warning-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{warning-color}
@kindex warning-color
@format
@code{warning-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``warning-color''
@end format
color for warnings: blue/yellow on black terminals


@findex info-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{info-color}
@kindex info-color
@format
@code{info-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``info-color''
@end format
color for info: green/cyan on black terminals


@findex success-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{success-color}
@kindex success-color
@format
@code{success-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``success-color''
@end format
color for success: green


@findex input-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{input-color}
@kindex input-color
@format
@code{input-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``input-color''
@end format
color for user-input: black/white (both bold)


@findex status-color ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{status-color}
@kindex status-color
@format
@code{status-color} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``status-color''
@end format
color mod for error highlight inverse


@c !! Commented out, because it makes no sense to document attr! without
@c    documenting how to produce an attr
@c doc-attr!

@subsubsection Color themes
Depending on wether you prefer bright or dark background the foreground
colors-theme can be changed by:

@findex light-mode ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{light-mode}
@kindex light-mode
@format
@code{light-mode} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``light-mode''
@end format
color theme for white background


@findex dark-mode ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dark-mode}
@kindex dark-mode
@format
@code{dark-mode} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``dark-mode''
@end format
color theme for black background


@findex uncolored-mode ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{uncolored-mode}
@kindex uncolored-mode
@format
@code{uncolored-mode} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``uncolored-mode''
@end format
This mode does not set colors, but uses the default ones.


@findex magenta-input ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{magenta-input}
@kindex magenta-input
@format
@code{magenta-input} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``magenta-input''
@end format
make input color easily recognizable (useful in presentations)



@node Single-key input, Line input and conversion, Terminal output, Other I/O
@subsection Single-key input
@cindex single-key input
@cindex input, single-key

If you want to get a single printable character, you can use @code{key}; to
check whether a character is available for @code{key}, you can use
@code{key?}.

@findex key ( @var{ -- char   } ) core
@cindex @code{key}
@kindex key
@format
@code{key} ( @i{-- char  }) core ``key''
@end format
Receive (but do not display) one character, @var{char}.


@findex key-ior ( @var{ -- char|ior   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{key-ior}
@kindex key-ior
@format
@code{key-ior} ( @i{-- char|ior  }) gforth-1.0 ``key-ior''
@end format
Receive (but do not display) one character, @var{char}, in case of an error
or interrupt, return the negative @var{ior} instead.


@findex key? ( @var{ -- flag   } ) facility
@cindex @code{key?}
@kindex key?
@format
@code{key?} ( @i{-- flag  }) facility ``key-question''
@end format
Determine whether a character is available. If a character is available,
@var{flag} is true; the next call to @code{key} will yield the
character. Once @code{key?} returns true, subsequent calls to @code{key?}
before calling @code{key} or @code{ekey} will also return true.


@findex xkey? ( @var{ -- flag   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xkey?}
@kindex xkey?
@format
@code{xkey?} ( @i{-- flag  }) xchar ``x-key-query''
@end format


If you want to process a mix of printable and non-printable characters, you
can do that with @code{ekey} and friends.  @code{Ekey} produces a keyboard
event that you have to convert into a character with @code{ekey>char} or
into a key identifier with @code{ekey>fkey}.

Typical code for using EKEY looks like this:

@example
ekey ekey>xchar if ( xc )
  ... \ do something with the character
else ekey>fkey if ( key-id )
  case
    k-up                                  of ... endof
    k-f1                                  of ... endof
    k-left k-shift-mask or k-ctrl-mask or of ... endof
    ...
  endcase
else ( keyboard-event )
  drop \ just ignore an unknown keyboard event type
then then
@end example

@findex ekey ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{ekey}
@kindex ekey
@format
@code{ekey} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``e-key''
@end format
Receive a keyboard event @var{u} (encoding implementation-defined).


@findex ekey>xchar ( @var{ u -- u false | xc true   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{ekey>xchar}
@kindex ekey>xchar
@format
@code{ekey>xchar} ( @i{u -- u false | xc true  }) xchar-ext ``e-key-to-x-char''
@end format
Convert keyboard event @var{u} into xchar @code{xc} if possible.


@findex ekey>char ( @var{ u -- u false | c true   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{ekey>char}
@kindex ekey>char
@format
@code{ekey>char} ( @i{u -- u false | c true  }) facility-ext ``e-key-to-char''
@end format
Convert keyboard event @var{u} into character @code{c} if possible.  Note
that non-ASCII characters produce @code{false} from both @code{ekey>char}
and @code{ekey>fkey}.  Instead of @code{ekey>char}, use @code{ekey>xchar} if
available.


@findex ekey>fkey ( @var{ u1 -- u2 f   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{ekey>fkey}
@kindex ekey>fkey
@format
@code{ekey>fkey} ( @i{u1 -- u2 f  }) facility-ext ``e-key-to-f-key''
@end format
If u1 is a keyboard event in the special key set, convert keyboard event
@var{u1} into key id @var{u2} and return true; otherwise return @var{u1} and
false.


@findex ekey? ( @var{ -- flag   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{ekey?}
@kindex ekey?
@format
@code{ekey?} ( @i{-- flag  }) facility-ext ``e-key-question''
@end format
True if a keyboard event is available.



The key identifiers for cursor keys are:

@findex k-left ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-left}
@kindex k-left
@format
@code{k-left} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-left''
@end format

@findex k-right ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-right}
@kindex k-right
@format
@code{k-right} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-right''
@end format

@findex k-up ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-up}
@kindex k-up
@format
@code{k-up} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-up''
@end format

@findex k-down ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-down}
@kindex k-down
@format
@code{k-down} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-down''
@end format

@findex k-home ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-home}
@kindex k-home
@format
@code{k-home} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-home''
@end format
aka Pos1


@findex k-end ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-end}
@kindex k-end
@format
@code{k-end} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-end''
@end format

@findex k-prior ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-prior}
@kindex k-prior
@format
@code{k-prior} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-prior''
@end format
aka PgUp


@findex k-next ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-next}
@kindex k-next
@format
@code{k-next} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-next''
@end format
aka PgDn    


@findex k-insert ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-insert}
@kindex k-insert
@format
@code{k-insert} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-insert''
@end format

@findex k-delete ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-delete}
@kindex k-delete
@format
@code{k-delete} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-delete''
@end format
the @key{DEL} key on my xterm, not backspace



The key identifiers for function keys (aka keypad keys) are:

@findex k-f1 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f1}
@kindex k-f1
@format
@code{k-f1} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-1''
@end format

@findex k-f2 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f2}
@kindex k-f2
@format
@code{k-f2} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-2''
@end format

@findex k-f3 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f3}
@kindex k-f3
@format
@code{k-f3} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-3''
@end format

@findex k-f4 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f4}
@kindex k-f4
@format
@code{k-f4} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-4''
@end format

@findex k-f5 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f5}
@kindex k-f5
@format
@code{k-f5} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-5''
@end format

@findex k-f6 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f6}
@kindex k-f6
@format
@code{k-f6} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-6''
@end format

@findex k-f7 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f7}
@kindex k-f7
@format
@code{k-f7} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-7''
@end format

@findex k-f8 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f8}
@kindex k-f8
@format
@code{k-f8} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-8''
@end format

@findex k-f9 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f9}
@kindex k-f9
@format
@code{k-f9} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-9''
@end format

@findex k-f10 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f10}
@kindex k-f10
@format
@code{k-f10} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-10''
@end format

@findex k-f11 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f11}
@kindex k-f11
@format
@code{k-f11} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-11''
@end format

@findex k-f12 ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-f12}
@kindex k-f12
@format
@code{k-f12} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-f-12''
@end format


Note that @code{k-f11} and @code{k-f12} are not as widely available.

You can combine these key identifiers with masks for various shift keys:

@findex k-shift-mask ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-shift-mask}
@kindex k-shift-mask
@format
@code{k-shift-mask} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-shift-mask''
@end format

@findex k-ctrl-mask ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-ctrl-mask}
@kindex k-ctrl-mask
@format
@code{k-ctrl-mask} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-ctrl-mask''
@end format

@findex k-alt-mask ( @var{ -- u   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{k-alt-mask}
@kindex k-alt-mask
@format
@code{k-alt-mask} ( @i{-- u  }) facility-ext ``k-alt-mask''
@end format


There are a number of keys that have ASCII values, and therefore are
unlikely to be reported as special keys, but the combination of these keys
with shift keys may be reported as a special key:

@findex k-enter ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-enter}
@kindex k-enter
@format
@code{k-enter} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-enter''
@end format

@findex k-backspace ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-backspace}
@kindex k-backspace
@format
@code{k-backspace} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-backspace''
@end format

@findex k-tab ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-tab}
@kindex k-tab
@format
@code{k-tab} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-tab''
@end format


Moreover, there the following key codes for keys and other events:

@findex k-winch ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-winch}
@kindex k-winch
@format
@code{k-winch} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-winch''
@end format
A key code that may be generated when the user changes the window size.


@findex k-pause ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-pause}
@kindex k-pause
@format
@code{k-pause} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-pause''
@end format

@findex k-mute ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-mute}
@kindex k-mute
@format
@code{k-mute} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-mute''
@end format

@findex k-volup ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-volup}
@kindex k-volup
@format
@code{k-volup} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-volup''
@end format

@findex k-voldown ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-voldown}
@kindex k-voldown
@format
@code{k-voldown} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-voldown''
@end format

@findex k-sel ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-sel}
@kindex k-sel
@format
@code{k-sel} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-sel''
@end format
keycode for Android selections


@findex k-eof ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{k-eof}
@kindex k-eof
@format
@code{k-eof} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``k-eof''
@end format


Note that, even if a Forth system has @code{ekey>fkey} and the key
identifier words, the keys are not necessarily available or it may not
necessarily be able to report all the keys and all the possible combinations
with shift masks.  Therefore, write your programs in such a way that they
are still useful even if the keys and key combinations cannot be pressed or
are not recognized.

Examples: Older keyboards often do not have an F11 and F12 key.  If you run
Gforth in an xterm, the xterm catches a number of combinations (e.g.,
@key{Shift-Up}), and never passes it to Gforth.  Finally, Gforth currently
does not recognize and report combinations with multiple shift keys (so the
@key{shift-ctrl-left} case in the example above would never be entered).

Gforth recognizes various keys available on ANSI terminals (in MS-DOS you
need the ANSI.SYS driver to get that behaviour); it works by recognizing the
escape sequences that ANSI terminals send when such a key is pressed.  If
you have a terminal that sends other escape sequences, you will not get
useful results on Gforth.  Other Forth systems may work in a different way.

Gforth also provides a few words for outputting names of function keys:

@findex fkey. ( @var{ u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fkey.}
@kindex fkey.
@format
@code{fkey.} ( @i{u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``fkey-dot''
@end format
Print a string representation for the function key @i{u}.  @i{U} must be a
function key (possibly with modifier masks), otherwise there may be an
exception.


@findex simple-fkey-string ( @var{ u1 -- c-addr u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{simple-fkey-string}
@kindex simple-fkey-string
@format
@code{simple-fkey-string} ( @i{u1 -- c-addr u  }) gforth-1.0 ``simple-fkey-string''
@end format
@i{c-addr u} is the string name of the function key @i{u1}.  Only works for
simple function keys without modifier masks.  Any @i{u1} that does not
correspond to a simple function key currently produces an exception.




@node Line input and conversion, Pipes, Single-key input, Other I/O
@subsection Line input and conversion
@cindex line input from terminal
@cindex input, linewise from terminal
@cindex convertin strings to numbers
@cindex I/O - see input

For ways of storing character strings in memory see @ref{String
representations}.

@comment TODO examples for >number >float accept key key? pad parse word refill
@comment then index them

Words for inputting one line from the keyboard:

@findex accept ( @var{ c-addr +n1 -- +n2   } ) core
@cindex @code{accept}
@kindex accept
@format
@code{accept} ( @i{c-addr +n1 -- +n2  }) core ``accept''
@end format
Get a string of up to @var{n1} characters from the user input device and
store it at @var{c-addr}.  @var{n2} is the length of the received
string. The user indicates the end by pressing @key{RET}.  Gforth supports
all the editing functions available on the Forth command line (including
history and word completion) in @code{accept}.


@findex edit-line ( @var{ c-addr n1 n2 -- n3   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{edit-line}
@kindex edit-line
@format
@code{edit-line} ( @i{c-addr n1 n2 -- n3  }) gforth-0.6 ``edit-line''
@end format
edit the string with length @var{n2} in the buffer @var{c-addr n1}, like
@code{accept}.



Conversion words:

@findex s>number? ( @var{ addr u -- d f   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{s>number?}
@kindex s>number?
@format
@code{s>number?} ( @i{addr u -- d f  }) gforth-0.5 ``s>number?''
@end format
converts string addr u into d, flag indicates success


@findex s>unumber? ( @var{ c-addr u -- ud flag   } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{s>unumber?}
@kindex s>unumber?
@format
@code{s>unumber?} ( @i{c-addr u -- ud flag  }) gforth-0.5 ``s>unumber?''
@end format
converts string c-addr u into ud, flag indicates success


@findex >number ( @var{ ud1 c-addr1 u1 -- ud2 c-addr2 u2   } ) core
@cindex @code{>number}
@kindex >number
@format
@code{>number} ( @i{ud1 c-addr1 u1 -- ud2 c-addr2 u2  }) core ``to-number''
@end format
Attempt to convert the character string @var{c-addr1 u1} to an unsigned
number in the current number base. The double @var{ud1} accumulates the
result of the conversion to form @var{ud2}. Conversion continues,
left-to-right, until the whole string is converted or a character that is
not convertable in the current number base is encountered (including + or
-). For each convertable character, @var{ud1} is first multiplied by the
value in @code{BASE} and then incremented by the value represented by the
character. @var{c-addr2} is the location of the first unconverted character
(past the end of the string if the whole string was converted). @var{u2} is
the number of unconverted characters in the string. Overflow is not
detected.


@findex >float ( @var{ c-addr u -- f:... flag  } ) floating
@cindex @code{>float}
@kindex >float
@format
@code{>float} ( @i{c-addr u -- f:... flag }) floating ``to-float''
@end format
Actual stack effect: ( c_addr u -- r t | f ).  Attempt to convert the
character string @i{c-addr u} to internal floating-point representation. If
the string represents a valid floating-point number, @i{r} is placed on the
floating-point stack and @i{flag} is true. Otherwise, @i{flag} is false. A
string of blanks is a special case and represents the floating-point number
0.

@findex >float1 ( @var{ c-addr u c -- f:... flag  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{>float1}
@kindex >float1
@format
@code{>float1} ( @i{c-addr u c -- f:... flag }) gforth-1.0 ``to-float1''
@end format
Actual stack effect: ( c_addr u c -- r t | f ).  Attempt to convert the
character string @i{c-addr u} to internal floating-point representation,
with @i{c} being the decimal separator.  If the string represents a valid
floating-point number, @i{r} is placed on the floating-point stack and
@i{flag} is true. Otherwise, @i{flag} is false. A string of blanks is a
special case and represents the floating-point number 0.


@comment obsolescent words..
Obsolescent input and conversion words:

@findex convert ( @var{ ud1 c-addr1 -- ud2 c-addr2   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{convert}
@kindex convert
@format
@code{convert} ( @i{ud1 c-addr1 -- ud2 c-addr2  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``convert''
@end format
Obsolescent: superseded by @code{>number}.


@findex expect ( @var{ c-addr +n --   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{expect}
@kindex expect
@format
@code{expect} ( @i{c-addr +n --  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``expect''
@end format
Receive a string of at most @i{+n} characters, and store it in memory
starting at @i{c-addr}. The string is displayed. Input terminates when the
<return> key is pressed or @i{+n} characters have been received. The normal
Gforth line editing capabilites are available. The length of the string is
stored in @code{span}; it does not include the <return>
character. OBSOLESCENT: superceeded by @code{accept}.


@findex span ( @var{ -- c-addr   } ) core-ext-obsolescent
@cindex @code{span}
@kindex span
@format
@code{span} ( @i{-- c-addr  }) core-ext-obsolescent ``span''
@end format
@code{Variable} -- @i{c-addr} is the address of a cell that stores the
length of the last string received by @code{expect}. OBSOLESCENT.




@node Pipes, Xchars and Unicode, Line input and conversion, Other I/O
@subsection Pipes
@cindex pipes, creating your own

In addition to using Gforth in pipes created by other processes
(@pxref{Gforth in pipes}), you can create your own pipe with
@code{open-pipe}, and read from or write to it.

@findex open-pipe ( @var{ c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{open-pipe}
@kindex open-pipe
@format
@code{open-pipe} ( @i{c-addr u wfam -- wfileid wior }) gforth-0.2 ``open-pipe''
@end format

@findex close-pipe ( @var{ wfileid -- wretval wior  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{close-pipe}
@kindex close-pipe
@format
@code{close-pipe} ( @i{wfileid -- wretval wior }) gforth-0.2 ``close-pipe''
@end format


If you write to a pipe, Gforth can throw a @code{broken-pipe-error}; if you
don't catch this exception, Gforth will catch it and exit, usually silently
(@pxref{Gforth in pipes}).  Since you probably do not want this, you should
wrap a @code{catch} or @code{try} block around the code from
@code{open-pipe} to @code{close-pipe}, so you can deal with the problem
yourself, and then return to regular processing.

@findex broken-pipe-error ( @var{ -- n   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{broken-pipe-error}
@kindex broken-pipe-error
@format
@code{broken-pipe-error} ( @i{-- n  }) gforth-0.6 ``broken-pipe-error''
@end format
the error number for a broken pipe



@node Xchars and Unicode, i18n and l10n, Pipes, Other I/O
@subsection Xchars and Unicode

ASCII is only appropriate for the English language. Most western languages
however fit somewhat into the Forth frame, since a byte is sufficient to
encode the few special characters in each (though not always the same
encoding can be used; latin-1 is most widely used, though). For other
languages, different char-sets have to be used, several of them
variable-width.  To deal with this problem, characters are often represented
as Unicode codepoints on the stack, and as UTF-8 byte strings in memory.  An
Unicode codepoint often represents one application-level character, but
Unicode also supports decomposed characters that consist of several code
points, e.g., a base letter and a combining diacritical mark.

An Unicode codepoint can consume more than one byte in memory, so we adjust
our terminology: A char is a raw byte in memory or a value in the range
0-255 on the stack.  An xchar (for extended char) stands for one codepoint;
it is represented by one or more bytes in memory and may have larger values
on the stack.  ASCII characters are the same as chars and as xchars: values
in the range 0-127, and a single byte with that value in memory.

When using UTF-8 encoding, all other codepoints take more than one
byte/char.  In most cases, you can just treat such characters as strings in
memory and don't need to use the following words, but if you want to deal
with individual codepoints, the following words are useful.  We currently
have no words for dealing with decomposed characters.

The xchar words add a few data types:

@itemize

@item
@var{xc} is an extended char (xchar) on the stack. It occupies one cell, and
is a subset of unsigned cell.  On 16 bit systems, only the BMP subset of the
Unicode character set (i.e., codepoints <65536) can be represented on the
stack.  If you represent your application characters as strings at all
times, you can avoid this limitation.

@item
@var{xc-addr} is the address of an xchar in memory. Alignment requirements
are the same as @var{c-addr}. The memory representation of an xchar differs
from the stack representation, and depends on the encoding used. An xchar
may use a variable number of chars in memory.

@item
@var{xc-addr} @var{u} is a buffer of xchars in memory, starting at
@var{xc-addr}, @var{u} chars (i.e., bytes, not xchars) long.

@end itemize

@findex xc-size ( @var{ xc -- u   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xc-size}
@kindex xc-size
@format
@code{xc-size} ( @i{xc -- u  }) xchar ``x-c-size''
@end format
Computes the memory size of the xchar @var{xc} in chars.


@findex x-size ( @var{ xc-addr u1 -- u2   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{x-size}
@kindex x-size
@format
@code{x-size} ( @i{xc-addr u1 -- u2  }) xchar ``x-size''
@end format
Computes the memory size of the first xchar stored at @var{xc-addr} in
chars.


@findex xc@@ ( @var{ xc-addr -- xc   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{xc@@}
@kindex xc@@
@format
@code{xc@@} ( @i{xc-addr -- xc  }) xchar-ext ``xc-fetch''
@end format
Fetchs the xchar @var{xc} at @var{xc-addr1}.


@findex xc@@+ ( @var{ xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2 xc   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xc@@+}
@kindex xc@@+
@format
@code{xc@@+} ( @i{xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2 xc  }) xchar ``x-c-fetch-plus''
@end format
Fetchs the xchar @var{xc} at @var{xc-addr1}. @var{xc-addr2} points to the
first memory location after @var{xc}.


@findex xc@@+? ( @var{ xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2 xc   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{xc@@+?}
@kindex xc@@+?
@format
@code{xc@@+?} ( @i{xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2 xc  }) gforth-experimental ``x-c-fetch-plus-query''
@end format
Fetchs the first xchar @var{xc} of the string @var{xc-addr1
u1}. @var{xc-addr2 u2} is the remaining string after @var{xc}.


@findex xc!+? ( @var{ xc xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2 f   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xc!+?}
@kindex xc!+?
@format
@code{xc!+?} ( @i{xc xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2 f  }) xchar ``x-c-store-plus-query''
@end format
Stores the xchar @var{xc} into the buffer starting at address
@var{xc-addr1}, @var{u1} chars large. @var{xc-addr2} points to the first
memory location after @var{xc}, @var{u2} is the remaining size of the
buffer. If the xchar @var{xc} did fit into the buffer, @var{f} is true,
otherwise @var{f} is false, and @var{xc-addr2} @var{u2} equal @var{xc-addr1}
@var{u1}. XC!+? is safe for buffer overflows, and therefore preferred over
XC!+.


@findex xc!+ ( @var{ xc xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xc!+}
@kindex xc!+
@format
@code{xc!+} ( @i{xc xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2  }) xchar ``x-c-store''
@end format
Stores the xchar @var{xc} at @var{xc-addr1}. @var{xc-addr2} is the next
unused address in the buffer.  Note that this writes up to 4 bytes, so you
need at least 3 bytes of padding after the end of the buffer to avoid
overwriting useful data if you only check the address against the end of the
buffer.


@findex xchar+ ( @var{ xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xchar+}
@kindex xchar+
@format
@code{xchar+} ( @i{xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2  }) xchar ``x-char-plus''
@end format
Adds the size of the xchar stored at @var{xc-addr1} to this address, giving
@var{xc-addr2}.


@findex xchar- ( @var{ xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{xchar-}
@kindex xchar-
@format
@code{xchar-} ( @i{xc-addr1 -- xc-addr2  }) xchar-ext ``x-char-minus''
@end format
Goes backward from @var{xc_addr1} until it finds an xchar so that the size
of this xchar added to @var{xc_addr2} gives @var{xc_addr1}.


@findex +x/string ( @var{ xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{+x/string}
@kindex +x/string
@format
@code{+x/string} ( @i{xc-addr1 u1 -- xc-addr2 u2  }) xchar-ext ``plus-x-slash-string''
@end format
Step forward by one xchar in the buffer defined by address @var{xc-addr1},
size @var{u1} chars. @var{xc-addr2} is the address and u2 the size in chars
of the remaining buffer after stepping over the first xchar in the buffer.


@findex x\string- ( @var{ xc-addr u1 -- xc-addr u2   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{x\string-}
@kindex x\string-
@format
@code{x\string-} ( @i{xc-addr u1 -- xc-addr u2  }) xchar-ext ``x-backslash-string-minus''
@end format
Step backward by one xchar in the buffer defined by address @var{xc-addr}
and size @var{u1} in chars, starting at the end of the buffer. @var{xc-addr}
is the address and @var{u2} the size in chars of the remaining buffer after
stepping backward over the last xchar in the buffer.


@findex -trailing-garbage ( @var{ xc-addr u1 -- xc-addr u2   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{-trailing-garbage}
@kindex -trailing-garbage
@format
@code{-trailing-garbage} ( @i{xc-addr u1 -- xc-addr u2  }) xchar-ext ``minus-trailing-garbage''
@end format
Examine the last XCHAR in the buffer @var{xc-addr} @var{u1}---if the
encoding is correct and it repesents a full char, @var{u2} equals @var{u1},
otherwise, @var{u2} represents the string without the last (garbled) xchar.


@findex x-width ( @var{ xc-addr u -- n   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{x-width}
@kindex x-width
@format
@code{x-width} ( @i{xc-addr u -- n  }) xchar-ext ``x-width''
@end format
@var{n} is the number of monospace ASCII chars that take the same space to
display as the the xchar string starting at @var{xc-addr}, using @var{u}
chars; assuming a monospaced display font, i.e. char width is always an
integer multiple of the width of an ASCII char.


@findex xkey ( @var{ -- xc   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xkey}
@kindex xkey
@format
@code{xkey} ( @i{-- xc  }) xchar ``x-key''
@end format
Reads an xchar from the terminal. This will discard all input events up to
the completion of the xchar.


@findex xc-width ( @var{ xc -- n   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{xc-width}
@kindex xc-width
@format
@code{xc-width} ( @i{xc -- n  }) xchar-ext ``x-c-width''
@end format
@var{xc} has a width of @var{n} times the width of a normal fixed-width
glyph.


@findex xhold ( @var{ xc --   } ) xchar-ext
@cindex @code{xhold}
@kindex xhold
@format
@code{xhold} ( @i{xc --  }) xchar-ext ``x-hold''
@end format
Used between @code{<<#} and @code{#>}. Prepend @var{xc} to the pictured
numeric output string.  Alternatively, use @code{holds}.


@findex xc, ( @var{ xchar --   } ) xchar
@cindex @code{xc,}
@kindex xc,
@format
@code{xc,} ( @i{xchar --  }) xchar ``x-c-comma''
@end format


@node i18n and l10n, Substitute, Xchars and Unicode, Other I/O
@subsection 国際化(I18n)とローカライズ

Programs for end users require to address those in their native language.
There is a decades old proposal for such a facility that has been split from
other proposals for international character sets like Xchars (@pxref{Xchars
and Unicode}) and Substitute (@pxref{Substitute}).  Messages displayed on
the screen need to be translated from the native language of the developers
to the local languages of the user.

Strings subject to translation are declared with @code{L"
}@var{string}@code{"}.  This returns a locale string identifier (LSID).
LSIDs are opaque types, taking a cell on the stack.  LSIDs can be translated
into a locale; locales are languages and country-specific variants of that
language.

@findex L" ( @var{ "lsid<">" -- lsid   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{L"}
@kindex L"
@format
@code{L"} ( @i{"lsid<">" -- lsid  }) gforth-experimental ``l-quote''
@end format
Parse a string and define a new lsid, if the string is uniquely new.
Identical strings result in identical lsids, which allows to refer to the
same lsid from multiple locations using the same string.


@findex LU" ( @var{ "lsid<">" -- lsid   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{LU"}
@kindex LU"
@format
@code{LU"} ( @i{"lsid<">" -- lsid  }) gforth-experimental ``l-unique-quote''
@end format
Parse a string and always define a new lsid, even if the string is not
unique.


@findex native@@ ( @var{ lsid -- addr u   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{native@@}
@kindex native@@
@format
@code{native@@} ( @i{lsid -- addr u  }) gforth-experimental ``native-fetch''
@end format
fetch native string from an @var{lsid}


@findex locale@@ ( @var{ lsid -- addr u   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{locale@@}
@kindex locale@@
@format
@code{locale@@} ( @i{lsid -- addr u  }) gforth-experimental ``locale-fetch''
@end format
fetch the localized string in the current language and country


@findex locale! ( @var{ addr u lsid --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{locale!}
@kindex locale!
@format
@code{locale!} ( @i{addr u lsid --  }) gforth-experimental ``locale-store''
@end format
Store localized string @var{addr u} for the current locale and country in
@var{lsid}.


@findex Language ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{Language}
@kindex Language
@format
@code{Language} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``Language''
@end format
define a locale.  Executing that locale makes it the current locale.


@findex Country ( @var{ <lang> "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{Country}
@kindex Country
@format
@code{Country} ( @i{<lang> "name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``Country''
@end format
define a variant (typical: country) for the current locale.  Executing that
locale makes it the current locale.  You can create variants of variants (a
country may have variants within, e.g. think of how many words for
rolls/buns there are in many languages).


@findex locale-file ( @var{ fid --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{locale-file}
@kindex locale-file
@format
@code{locale-file} ( @i{fid --  }) gforth-experimental ``locale-file''
@end format
read lines from @var{fid} into the current locale.


@findex included-locale ( @var{ addr u --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{included-locale}
@kindex included-locale
@format
@code{included-locale} ( @i{addr u --  }) gforth-experimental ``included-locale''
@end format
read lines from the file @var{addr u} into the current locale.


@findex include-locale ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{include-locale}
@kindex include-locale
@format
@code{include-locale} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``include-locale''
@end format
read lines from the file @var{"name"} into the current locale.


@findex locale-csv ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{locale-csv}
@kindex locale-csv
@format
@code{locale-csv} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``locale-csv''
@end format
import comma-separated value table into locales.  first line contains locale
names, “program” and “default” are special entries; generic languages must
preceed translations for specific countries.  Entries under “program” (must
be leftmost) are used to search for the lsid; if empty, the line number-1 is
the lsid index.


@findex .locale-csv ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{.locale-csv}
@kindex .locale-csv
@format
@code{.locale-csv} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``dot-locale-csv''
@end format
write the locale database in CSV format to the terminal output.


@findex locale-csv-out ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{locale-csv-out}
@kindex locale-csv-out
@format
@code{locale-csv-out} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``locale-csv''
@end format
Create file @var{"name"} and write the locale database out to the file
@var{"name"} in CSV format.



@node Substitute, CSV Reader, i18n and l10n, Other I/O
@subsection Substitute

This is a simple text macro replacement facility.  Texts in the form
@code{"text %macro% text"} are processed, and the macro variables enclosed
in @code{'%'} are replaced with their associated strings.  Two consecutive
@code{%} are replaced by one @code{%}.  Macros are defined in a specific
wordlist, and return a string upon execution; the standard defines only one
way to declare macros, @code{replaces}, which creates a macro that just
returns a string.

@findex macros-wordlist ( @var{ -- wid   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{macros-wordlist}
@kindex macros-wordlist
@format
@code{macros-wordlist} ( @i{-- wid  }) gforth-experimental ``macros-wordlist''
@end format
wordlist for string replacement macros


@findex replaces ( @var{ addr1 len1 addr2 len2 --   } ) string-ext
@cindex @code{replaces}
@kindex replaces
@format
@code{replaces} ( @i{addr1 len1 addr2 len2 --  }) string-ext ``replaces''
@end format
create a macro with name @var{addr2 len2} and content @var{addr1 len1}.  If
the macro already exists, just change the content.


@findex .substitute ( @var{ addr1 len1 -- n / ior   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{.substitute}
@kindex .substitute
@format
@code{.substitute} ( @i{addr1 len1 -- n / ior  }) gforth-experimental ``dot-substitute''
@end format
substitute all macros in text @var{addr1 len1} and print the result.
@var{n} is the number of substitutions or, if negative, a throwable
@var{ior}.


@findex $substitute ( @var{ addr1 len1 -- addr2 len2 n/ior   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{$substitute}
@kindex $substitute
@format
@code{$substitute} ( @i{addr1 len1 -- addr2 len2 n/ior  }) gforth-experimental ``string-substitute''
@end format
substitute all macros in text @var{addr1 len1}.  @var{n} is the number of
substitutions, if negative, it's a throwable @var{ior}, @var{addr2 len2} the
result.


@findex substitute ( @var{ addr1 len1 addr2 len2 -- addr2 len3 n/ior   } ) string-ext
@cindex @code{substitute}
@kindex substitute
@format
@code{substitute} ( @i{addr1 len1 addr2 len2 -- addr2 len3 n/ior  }) string-ext ``substitute''
@end format
substitute all macros in text @var{addr1 len1}, and copy the result to
@var{addr2 len2}.  @var{n} is the number of substitutions or, if negative, a
throwable @var{ior}, @var{addr2 len3} the result.


@findex unescape ( @var{ addr1 u1 dest -- dest u2   } ) string-ext
@cindex @code{unescape}
@kindex unescape
@format
@code{unescape} ( @i{addr1 u1 dest -- dest u2  }) string-ext ``unescape''
@end format
double all delimiters in @var{addr1 u1}, so that substitute will result in
the original text.  Note that the buffer @var{dest} does not have a size, as
in worst case, it will need just twice as many characters as
@var{u1}. @var{dest u2} is the resulting string.


@findex $unescape ( @var{ addr1 u1 -- addr2 u2   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{$unescape}
@kindex $unescape
@format
@code{$unescape} ( @i{addr1 u1 -- addr2 u2  }) gforth-experimental ``string-unescape''
@end format
same as @code{unescape}, but creates a temporary destination string with
@code{$tmp}.



@node CSV Reader, , Substitute, Other I/O
@subsection CSV Reader

Comma-separated values (CSV) are a popular text format to interchange data.
Gforth provides an reader in @file{csv.fs}.

@findex read-csv ( @var{ addr u xt --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{read-csv}
@kindex read-csv
@format
@code{read-csv} ( @i{addr u xt --  }) gforth-experimental ``read-csv''
@end format
read CVS file @var{addr u} and execute @var{xt} for every item found.
@var{xt} takes @code{( addr u col line -- )}, i.e. the string, the current
column (starting with 0), and the current line (starting with 1).



@node OS command line arguments, Locals, Other I/O, Words
@section OS command line arguments
@cindex OS command line arguments
@cindex command line arguments, OS
@cindex arguments, OS command line

The usual way to pass arguments to Gforth programs on the command line is
via the @option{-e} option, e.g.

@example
gforth -e "123 456" foo.fs -e bye
@end example

However, you may want to interpret the command-line arguments directly.  In
that case, you can access the (image-specific) command-line arguments
through @code{next-arg}:

@findex next-arg ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{next-arg}
@kindex next-arg
@format
@code{next-arg} ( @i{-- addr u  }) gforth-0.7 ``next-arg''
@end format
get the next argument from the OS command line, consuming it; if there is no
argument left, return @code{0 0}.



Here's an example program @file{echo.fs} for @code{next-arg}:

@example
: echo ( -- )
    begin
	next-arg 2dup 0 0 d<> while
	    type space
    repeat
    2drop ;

echo cr bye
@end example

This can be invoked with

@example
gforth echo.fs hello world
@end example

and it will print

@example
hello world
@end example

The next lower level of dealing with the OS command line are the following
words:

@findex arg ( @var{ u -- addr count   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{arg}
@kindex arg
@format
@code{arg} ( @i{u -- addr count  }) gforth-0.2 ``arg''
@end format
Return the string for the @i{u}th command-line argument; returns @code{0 0}
if the access is beyond the last argument.  @code{0 arg} is the program name
with which you started Gforth.  The next unprocessed argument is always
@code{1 arg}, the one after that is @code{2 arg} etc.  All arguments already
processed by the system are deleted.  After you have processed an argument,
you can delete it with @code{shift-args}.


@findex shift-args ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{shift-args}
@kindex shift-args
@format
@code{shift-args} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``shift-args''
@end format
@code{1 arg} is deleted, shifting all following OS command line parameters
to the left by 1, and reducing @code{argc @@}.  This word can change
@code{argv @@}.



Finally, at the lowest level Gforth provides the following words:

@findex argc ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{argc}
@kindex argc
@format
@code{argc} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``argc''
@end format
@code{Variable} -- the number of command-line arguments (including the
command name).  Changed by @code{next-arg} and @code{shift-args}.


@findex argv ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{argv}
@kindex argv
@format
@code{argv} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``argv''
@end format
@code{Variable} -- a pointer to a vector of pointers to the command-line
arguments (including the command-name). Each argument is represented as a
C-style zero-terminated string.  Changed by @code{next-arg} and
@code{shift-args}.



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Locals, Structures, OS command line arguments, Words
@section Locals
@cindex locals

Local variables can make Forth programming more enjoyable and Forth programs
easier to read. Unfortunately, the locals of Standard Forth are laden with
restrictions. Therefore, we provide not only the Standard Forth locals
wordset, but also our own, more powerful locals wordset (we implemented the
Standard Forth locals wordset through our locals wordset).

The ideas in this section have also been published in M. Anton Ertl,
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl94l.ps.gz,
Automatic Scoping of Local Variables}}, EuroForth '94.

@menu
* Gforth locals::
* Standard Forth locals::    
@end menu

@node Gforth locals, Standard Forth locals, Locals, Locals
@subsection Gforth locals
@cindex Gforth locals
@cindex locals, Gforth style

Locals can be defined with

@example
@{: local1 local2 ... -- comment :@}
@end example
or
@example
@{: local1 local2 ... :@}
@end example
or
@example
@{: local1 local2 ... | ulocal0 ulocal1 -- comment :@}
@end example

E.g.,
@example
: max @{: n1 n2 -- n3 :@}
 n1 n2 > if
   n1
 else
   n2
 endif ;
@end example

The similarity of locals definitions with stack comments is intended. A
locals definition often replaces the stack comment of a word. The order of
the locals corresponds to the order in a stack comment and everything after
the @code{--} is really a comment.

This similarity has one disadvantage: It is too easy to confuse locals
declarations with stack comments, causing bugs and making them hard to
find. However, this problem can be avoided by appropriate coding
conventions: Do not use both notations in the same program. If you do, they
should be distinguished using additional means, e.g. by position.

@cindex types of locals
@cindex locals types
The name of the local may be preceded by a type specifier, e.g., @code{F:}
for a floating point value:

@example
: CX* @{: F: Ar F: Ai F: Br F: Bi -- Cr Ci :@}
\ complex multiplication
 Ar Br f* Ai Bi f* f-
 Ar Bi f* Ai Br f* f+ ;
@end example

@cindex flavours of locals
@cindex locals flavours
@cindex value-flavoured locals
@cindex varue-flavoured locals
@cindex variable-flavoured locals
Gforth currently supports cells (@code{W:}, @code{WA:}, @code{W^}), doubles
(@code{D:}, @code{DA:}, @code{D^}), floats (@code{F:}, @code{FA:},
@code{F^}), characters (@code{C:}, @code{CA:}, @code{C^}), and xts
(@code{xt:}, @code{xta:}) in several flavours:

@table @dfn

@item value-flavoured
(@pxref{Values}) A value-flavoured local (defined with @code{W:}, @code{D:}
etc.) produces its value and can be changed with @code{TO}.

@item varue-flavoured
(@pxref{Varues}) A varue-flavoured local @i{l} (defined with @code{WA:}
etc.) behaves exactly like a value-flavoured local, except that you can use
@code{addr @i{l}} to get its address (which becomes invalid when the
variable's scope is left).  Currently there is no performance difference,
but in the long run value-flavoured locals will be significantly faster,
because they can reside in registers.

@item variable-flavoured
(@pxref{Variables}) A variable-flavoured local (defined with @code{W^} etc.)
produces its address (which becomes invalid when the variable's scope is
left).  E.g., the standard word @code{emit} can be defined in terms of
@code{type} like this:

@example
: emit @{: C^ char* -- :@}
    char* 1 type ;
@end example

@item defer-flavoured
(@pxref{Deferred Words}) A defer-flavoured local (defined with @code{XT:} or
@code{XTA:}) @code{execute}s the xt; you can use @code{action-of}
(@pxref{Deferred Words}) to get the xt out of a defer-flavoured local.  If
the local is defined with @code{xta:}, you can use @code{addr} to get the
address (valid until the end of the scope of the local) where the xt is
stored.  E.g., the standard word @code{execute} can be defined with a
defer-flavoured local like this:

@example
: execute @{: xt: x -- :@}
  x ;
@end example

@end table

@cindex default type of locals
@cindex locals, default type
A local without type specifier is a @code{W:} local.  You can allow or
disallow the use of @code{addr} with:

@findex default-wa: ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{default-wa:}
@kindex default-wa:
@format
@code{default-wa:} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``default-wa:''
@end format
Allow @code{addr} on locals defined without a type specifyer.  On other
words, define locals without a type specifyer using @code{wa:}.


@findex default-w: ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{default-w:}
@kindex default-w:
@format
@code{default-w:} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``default-w:''
@end format
Forbid @code{addr} on locals defined without a type specifyer.  On other
words, define locals without a type specifyer using @code{w:}.



@cindex locals initialization
@cindex initialization of locals
All flavours of locals are initialized with values from the data or (for FP
locals) FP stack, with the exception being locals defined behind @code{|}:
Gforth initializes them to 0; some Forth systems leave them uninitialized.

@cindex data structure locals
Gforth supports the square bracket notation for local buffers and data
structures.  These locals are similar to variable-flavored locals, the size
is specified as a constant expression.  A declaration looks @code{@i{name}[
@i{size} ]}.  The Forth expression @code{@i{size}} is evaluated during
declaration, it must have the stack effect @code{( -- +n )}, giving the size
in bytes.  The square bracket @code{[} is part of the defined name.

Local data structures are initialized by copying @i{size} bytes from an
address passed on the stack; uninitialized local data structures (after
@code{|} in the declaration) are not erased, they just contain whatever data
there was on the locals stack before.

Example:

@example
begin-structure test-struct
  field: a1
  field: a2
end-structure

: test-local @{: foo[ test-struct ] :@}
    foo[ a1 !  foo[ a2 !
    foo[ test-struct dump ;
@end example

Gforth allows defining locals everywhere in a colon definition. This poses
the following questions:

@menu
* Locals definition words::
* Where are locals visible by name?::
* How long do locals live?::
* Locals programming style::
* Locals implementation::
* Closures::                 
@end menu

@node Locals definition words, Where are locals visible by name?, Gforth locals, Gforth locals
@subsubsection Locals definitions words

This section documents the words used for defining locals.  Note that the
run-times for the words (like @code{W:}) that define a local are performed
from the rightmost defined local to the leftmost defined local, such that
the rightmost local gets the top of stack.

@findex @{: ( @var{ -- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0   } ) local-ext
@cindex @code{@{:}
@kindex @{:
@format
@code{@{:} ( @i{-- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0  }) local-ext ``open-brace-colon''
@end format
Start locals definitions.


@findex -- ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 ... --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{--}
@kindex --
@format
@code{--} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 ... --  }) gforth-0.2 ``dash-dash''
@end format
During locals definitions everything from @code{--} to @code{:@}} is
ignored.  This is typically used when you want to make a locals definition
serve double duty as a stack effect description.


@findex | ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{|}
@kindex |
@format
@code{|} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``bar''
@end format
Locals defined behind @code{|} are not initialized from the stack; so the
run-time of words like @code{W:} changes to @code{( -- )}.


@findex :@} ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 xt1 ... xtn --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}}
@format
@code{:@}} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 xt1 ... xtn --  }) gforth-1.0 ``colon-close-brace''
@end format
Ends locals definitions.


@findex @{ ( @var{ -- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{@{}
@kindex @{
@format
@code{@{} ( @i{-- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0  }) gforth-0.2 ``open-brace''
@end format
Start locals definitions.  The Forth-2012 standard name for this word is
@code{@{:}.


@findex @} ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 xt1 ... xtn --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{@}}
@kindex @}
@format
@code{@}} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 xt1 ... xtn --  }) gforth-0.2 ``close-brace''
@end format
Ends locals definitions.  The Forth-2012 standard name for this word is
@code{:@}}.


@findex W: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{W:}
@kindex W:
@format
@code{W:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --  }) gforth-0.2 ``w-colon''
@end format
Define value-flavoured cell local @i{name} @code{( -- x1 )}


@findex WA: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{WA:}
@kindex WA:
@format
@code{WA:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --  }) gforth-1.0 ``w-a-colon''
@end format
Define varue-flavoured cell local @i{name} @code{( -- x1 )}


@findex W^ ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{W^}
@kindex W^
@format
@code{W^} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x --  }) gforth-0.2 ``w-caret''
@end format
Define variable-flavoured cell local @i{name} @code{( -- a-addr )}


@findex D: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{D:}
@kindex D:
@format
@code{D:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --  }) gforth-0.2 ``d-colon''
@end format
Define value-flavoured double local @i{name} @code{( -- x3 x4 )}


@findex DA: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{DA:}
@kindex DA:
@format
@code{DA:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --  }) gforth-1.0 ``w-a-colon''
@end format
Define varue-flavoured double local @i{name} @code{( -- x3 x4 )}


@findex D^ ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{D^}
@kindex D^
@format
@code{D^} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time x1 x2 --  }) gforth-0.2 ``d-caret''
@end format
Define variable-flavoured double local @i{name} @code{( -- a-addr )}


@findex C: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{C:}
@kindex C:
@format
@code{C:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --  }) gforth-0.2 ``c-colon''
@end format
Define value-flavoured char local @i{name} @code{( -- c1 )}


@findex CA: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{CA:}
@kindex CA:
@format
@code{CA:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-a-colon''
@end format
Define varue-flavoured char local @i{name} @code{( -- c1 )}


@findex C^ ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{C^}
@kindex C^
@format
@code{C^} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time c --  }) gforth-0.2 ``c-caret''
@end format
Define variable-flavoured char local @i{name} @code{( -- c-addr )}


@findex F: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time r --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{F:}
@kindex F:
@format
@code{F:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time r --  }) gforth-0.2 ``f-colon''
@end format
Define value-flavoured float local @i{name} @code{( -- r1 )}


@findex FA: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time f --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{FA:}
@kindex FA:
@format
@code{FA:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time f --  }) gforth-1.0 ``f-a-colon''
@end format
Define varue-flavoured float local @i{name} @code{( -- r1 )}


@findex F^ ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time r --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{F^}
@kindex F^
@format
@code{F^} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time r --  }) gforth-0.2 ``f-caret''
@end format
Define variable-flavoured float local @i{name} @code{( -- f-addr )}


@findex XT: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time xt1 --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{XT:}
@kindex XT:
@format
@code{XT:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time xt1 --  }) gforth-1.0 ``x-t-colon''
@end format
Define defer-flavoured cell local @i{name} @code{( ... -- ... )}


@findex XTA: ( @var{ compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time ... -- ...   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{XTA:}
@kindex XTA:
@format
@code{XTA:} ( @i{compilation "name" -- a-addr xt; run-time ... -- ...  }) gforth-1.0 ``x-t-a-colon''
@end format
Define a defer-flavoured local @i{name} on which @code{addr} can be used.



Note that @code{|}, @code{--}, @code{:@}} and @code{@}} are not normally in
the search order (they are in the vocabulary @code{locals-types}), and they
are not necessarily words in all Forth systems; therefore they are
documented as Gforth words.

@node Where are locals visible by name?, How long do locals live?, Locals definition words, Gforth locals
@subsubsection Where are locals visible by name?
@cindex locals visibility
@cindex visibility of locals
@cindex scope of locals

Basically, the answer is that locals are visible where you would expect it
in block-structured languages, and sometimes a little longer. If you want to
restrict the scope of a local, enclose its definition in
@code{SCOPE}...@code{ENDSCOPE}.


@findex scope ( @var{ compilation  -- scope ; run-time  --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{scope}
@kindex scope
@format
@code{scope} ( @i{compilation  -- scope ; run-time  --  }) gforth-0.2 ``scope''
@end format

@findex endscope ( @var{ compilation scope -- ; run-time  --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{endscope}
@kindex endscope
@format
@code{endscope} ( @i{compilation scope -- ; run-time  --  }) gforth-0.2 ``endscope''
@end format



These words behave like control structure words, so you can use them with
@code{CS-PICK} and @code{CS-ROLL} to restrict the scope in arbitrary ways.

If you want a more exact answer to the visibility question, here's the basic
principle: A local is visible in all places that can only be reached through
the definition of the local@footnote{In compiler construction terminology,
all places dominated by the definition of the local.}. In other words, it is
not visible in places that can be reached without going through the
definition of the local. E.g., locals defined in @code{IF}...@code{ENDIF}
are visible until the @code{ENDIF}, locals defined in
@code{BEGIN}...@code{UNTIL} are visible after the @code{UNTIL} (until, e.g.,
a subsequent @code{ENDSCOPE}).

The reasoning behind this solution is: We want to have the locals visible as
long as it is meaningful. The user can always make the visibility shorter by
using explicit scoping. In a place that can only be reached through the
definition of a local, the meaning of a local name is clear. In other places
it is not: How is the local initialized at the control flow path that does
not contain the definition? Which local is meant, if the same name is
defined twice in two independent control flow paths?

This should be enough detail for nearly all users, so you can skip the rest
of this section. If you really must know all the gory details and options,
read on.

In order to implement this rule, the compiler has to know which places are
unreachable. It knows this automatically after @code{AHEAD}, @code{AGAIN},
@code{EXIT} and @code{LEAVE}; in other cases (e.g., after most
@code{THROW}s), you can use the word @code{UNREACHABLE} to tell the compiler
that the control flow never reaches that place. If @code{UNREACHABLE} is not
used where it could, the only consequence is that the visibility of some
locals is more limited than the rule above says. If @code{UNREACHABLE} is
used where it should not (i.e., if you lie to the compiler), buggy code will
be produced.


@findex UNREACHABLE ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{UNREACHABLE}
@kindex UNREACHABLE
@format
@code{UNREACHABLE} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``UNREACHABLE''
@end format



Another problem with this rule is that at @code{BEGIN}, the compiler does
not know which locals will be visible on the incoming back-edge. All
problems discussed in the following are due to this ignorance of the
compiler (we discuss the problems using @code{BEGIN} loops as examples; the
discussion also applies to @code{?DO} and other loops). Perhaps the most
insidious example is:
@example
AHEAD
BEGIN
  x
[ 1 CS-ROLL ] THEN
  @{: x :@}
  ...
UNTIL
@end example

This should be legal according to the visibility rule. The use of @code{x}
can only be reached through the definition; but that appears textually below
the use.

From this example it is clear that the visibility rules cannot be fully
implemented without major headaches. Our implementation treats common cases
as advertised and the exceptions are treated in a safe way: The compiler
makes a reasonable guess about the locals visible after a @code{BEGIN}; if
it is too pessimistic, the user will get a spurious error about the local
not being defined; if the compiler is too optimistic, it will notice this
later and issue a warning. In the case above the compiler would complain
about @code{x} being undefined at its use. You can see from the obscure
examples in this section that it takes quite unusual control structures to
get the compiler into trouble, and even then it will often do fine.

If the @code{BEGIN} is reachable from above, the most optimistic guess is
that all locals visible before the @code{BEGIN} will also be visible after
the @code{BEGIN}. This guess is valid for all loops that are entered only
through the @code{BEGIN}, in particular, for normal
@code{BEGIN}...@code{WHILE}...@code{REPEAT} and @code{BEGIN}...@code{UNTIL}
loops and it is implemented in our compiler. When the branch to the
@code{BEGIN} is finally generated by @code{AGAIN} or @code{UNTIL}, the
compiler checks the guess and warns the user if it was too optimistic:
@example
IF
  @{: x :@}
BEGIN
  \ x ? 
[ 1 cs-roll ] THEN
  ...
UNTIL
@end example

Here, @code{x} lives only until the @code{BEGIN}, but the compiler
optimistically assumes that it lives until the @code{THEN}. It notices this
difference when it compiles the @code{UNTIL} and issues a warning. The user
can avoid the warning, and make sure that @code{x} is not used in the wrong
area by using explicit scoping:
@example
IF
  SCOPE
  @{: x :@}
  ENDSCOPE
BEGIN
[ 1 cs-roll ] THEN
  ...
UNTIL
@end example

Since the guess is optimistic, there will be no spurious error messages
about undefined locals.

If the @code{BEGIN} is not reachable from above (e.g., after @code{AHEAD} or
@code{EXIT}), the compiler cannot even make an optimistic guess, as the
locals visible after the @code{BEGIN} may be defined later.

It pessimistically assumes that all locals are visible that were visible at
the latest place outside any control structure (i.e., where nothing is on
the control-flow stack).  This means that in:

@example
: foo
  IF @{: z :@} THEN
  @{: x :@}
  AHEAD
    BEGIN
      ( * )
    [ 1 CS-ROLL ] THEN
    @{: y :@}
    ...
  UNTIL ;
@end example

At the place marked with @code{( * )}, @code{x} is visible, but @code{y} is
not (although, according to the reachability rule it should); @code{z} is
not and should not be visible there.

However, you can use @code{ASSUME-LIVE} to make the compiler assume that the
same locals are visible at the BEGIN as at the point where the top
control-flow stack item was created.


@findex ASSUME-LIVE ( @var{ orig -- orig   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{ASSUME-LIVE}
@kindex ASSUME-LIVE
@format
@code{ASSUME-LIVE} ( @i{orig -- orig  }) gforth-0.2 ``ASSUME-LIVE''
@end format



@noindent
E.g.,
@example
IF
  @{: x :@}
  AHEAD
    ASSUME-LIVE
    BEGIN
      x
    [ 1 CS-ROLL ] THEN
    ...
  UNTIL
THEN
@end example

Here @code{x} would not be visible at the use of @code{x}, because its
definition is inside a control structure, but by using ASSUME-LIVE the
programmer tells the compiler that the locals visible at the @code{AHEAD}
should be visible at the @code{BEGIN}.

Other cases where the locals are defined before the @code{BEGIN} can be
handled by inserting an appropriate @code{CS-ROLL} before the
@code{ASSUME-LIVE} (and changing the control-flow stack manipulation behind
the @code{ASSUME-LIVE}).

Cases where locals are defined after the @code{BEGIN} (but should be visible
immediately after the @code{BEGIN}) can only be handled by rearranging the
loop. E.g., the ``most insidious'' example above can be arranged into:
@example
BEGIN
  @{: x :@}
  ... 0=
WHILE
  x
REPEAT
@end example

@node How long do locals live?, Locals programming style, Where are locals visible by name?, Gforth locals
@subsubsection How long do locals live?
@cindex locals lifetime
@cindex lifetime of locals

The right answer for the lifetime question would be: A local lives at least
as long as it can be accessed. For a value-flavoured local this means: until
the end of its visibility. However, a variable-flavoured local could be
accessed through its address far beyond its visibility scope. Ultimately,
this would mean that such locals would have to be garbage collected. Since
this entails un-Forth-like implementation complexities, I adopted the same
cowardly solution as some other languages (e.g., C): The local lives only as
long as it is visible; afterwards its address is invalid (and programs that
access it afterwards are erroneous).

@node Locals programming style, Locals implementation, How long do locals live?, Gforth locals
@subsubsection Locals programming style
@cindex locals programming style
@cindex programming style, locals

The freedom to define locals anywhere has the potential to change
programming styles dramatically. In particular, the need to use the return
stack for intermediate storage vanishes. Moreover, all stack manipulations
(except @code{PICK}s and @code{ROLL}s with run-time determined arguments)
can be eliminated: If the stack items are in the wrong order, just write a
locals definition for all of them; then write the items in the order you
want.

This seems a little far-fetched and eliminating stack manipulations is
unlikely to become a conscious programming objective. Still, the number of
stack manipulations will be reduced dramatically if local variables are used
liberally (e.g., compare @code{max} (@pxref{Gforth locals}) with a
traditional implementation of @code{max}).

This shows one potential benefit of locals: making Forth programs more
readable. Of course, this benefit will only be realized if the programmers
continue to honour the principle of factoring instead of using the added
latitude to make the words longer.

@cindex single-assignment style for locals
Using @code{TO} can and should be avoided.  Without @code{TO}, every
value-flavoured local has only a single assignment and many advantages of
functional languages apply to Forth. I.e., programs are easier to analyse,
to optimize and to read: It is clear from the definition what the local
stands for, it does not turn into something different later.

E.g., a definition using @code{TO} might look like this:
@example
: strcmp @{: addr1 u1 addr2 u2 -- n :@}
 u1 u2 min 0
 ?do
   addr1 c@@ addr2 c@@ -
   ?dup-if
     unloop exit
   then
   addr1 char+ TO addr1
   addr2 char+ TO addr2
 loop
 u1 u2 - ;
@end example
Here, @code{TO} is used to update @code{addr1} and @code{addr2} at every
loop iteration. @code{strcmp} is a typical example of the readability
problems of using @code{TO}. When you start reading @code{strcmp}, you think
that @code{addr1} refers to the start of the string. Only near the end of
the loop you realize that it is something else.

This can be avoided by defining two locals at the start of the loop that are
initialized with the right value for the current iteration.
@example
: strcmp @{: addr1 u1 addr2 u2 -- n :@}
 addr1 addr2
 u1 u2 min 0 
 ?do @{: s1 s2 :@}
   s1 c@@ s2 c@@ -
   ?dup-if
     unloop exit
   then
   s1 char+ s2 char+
 loop
 2drop
 u1 u2 - ;
@end example
Here it is clear from the start that @code{s1} has a different value in
every loop iteration.

@node Locals implementation, Closures, Locals programming style, Gforth locals
@subsubsection Locals implementation
@cindex locals implementation
@cindex implementation of locals

@cindex locals stack
Gforth uses an extra locals stack. The most compelling reason for this is
that the return stack is not float-aligned; using an extra stack also
eliminates the problems and restrictions of using the return stack as locals
stack. Like the other stacks, the locals stack grows toward lower
addresses. A few primitives allow an efficient implementation; you should
not use them directly, but they appear in the output of @code{see}, so they
are documented here:

@findex @@localn ( @var{ noffset -- w  } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{@@localn}
@kindex @@localn
@format
@code{@@localn} ( @i{noffset -- w }) gforth-internal ``fetch-local-n''
@end format

@findex f@@localn ( @var{ noffset -- r  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{f@@localn}
@kindex f@@localn
@format
@code{f@@localn} ( @i{noffset -- r }) gforth-1.0 ``f-fetch-local-n''
@end format

@findex lp@@ ( @var{ -- c-addr  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{lp@@}
@kindex lp@@
@format
@code{lp@@} ( @i{-- c-addr }) gforth-0.2 ``lp-fetch''
@end format
@i{C_addr} is the current value of the locals stack pointer.

doc-lp+!#
@findex lp! ( @var{ c-addr --  } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{lp!}
@kindex lp!
@format
@code{lp!} ( @i{c-addr -- }) gforth-internal ``lp-store''
@end format

@findex >l ( @var{ w --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>l}
@kindex >l
@format
@code{>l} ( @i{w -- }) gforth-0.2 ``to-l''
@end format

@findex f>l ( @var{ r --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f>l}
@kindex f>l
@format
@code{f>l} ( @i{r -- }) gforth-0.2 ``f-to-l''
@end format



In addition to these primitives, some specializations of these primitives
for commonly occurring inline arguments are provided for efficiency reasons,
e.g., @code{@@local0} as specialization of @code{0 @@localn}. The following
compiling words compile the right specialized version, or the general
version, as appropriate:


@c doc-compile-@local
@c doc-compile-f@local
@findex compile-lp+! ( @var{ n --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{compile-lp+!}
@kindex compile-lp+!
@format
@code{compile-lp+!} ( @i{n --  }) gforth-0.2 ``compile-l-p-plus-store''
@end format



Combinations of conditional branches and @code{lp+!#} like
@code{?branch-lp+!#} (the locals pointer is only changed if the branch is
taken) are provided for efficiency and correctness in loops.

A special area in the dictionary space is reserved for keeping the local
variable names. @code{@{:} switches the dictionary pointer to this area and
@code{:@}} switches it back and generates the locals initializing
code. @code{W:} etc.@ are normal defining words. This special area is
cleared at the start of every colon definition.

@cindex word list for defining locals
A special feature of Gforth's dictionary is used to implement the definition
of locals without type specifiers: every word list (aka vocabulary) has its
own methods for searching etc. (@pxref{Word Lists}). For the present purpose
we defined a word list with a special search method: When it is searched for
a word, it actually creates that word using @code{W:}. @code{@{:} changes
the search order to first search the word list containing @code{:@}},
@code{W:} etc., and then the word list for defining locals without type
specifiers.

The lifetime rules support a stack discipline within a colon definition: The
lifetime of a local is either nested with other locals lifetimes or it does
not overlap them.

At @code{BEGIN}, @code{IF}, and @code{AHEAD} no code for locals stack
pointer manipulation is generated. Between control structure words locals
definitions can push locals onto the locals stack. @code{AGAIN} is the
simplest of the other three control flow words. It has to restore the locals
stack depth of the corresponding @code{BEGIN} before branching. The code
looks like this:
@format
@code{lp+!#} current-locals-size @minus{} dest-locals-size
@code{branch} <begin>
@end format

@code{UNTIL} is a little more complicated: If it branches back, it must
adjust the stack just like @code{AGAIN}. But if it falls through, the locals
stack must not be changed. The compiler generates the following code:
@format
@code{?branch-lp+!#} <begin> current-locals-size @minus{} dest-locals-size
@end format
The locals stack pointer is only adjusted if the branch is taken.

@code{THEN} can produce somewhat inefficient code:
@format
@code{lp+!#} current-locals-size @minus{} orig-locals-size
<orig target>:
@code{lp+!#} orig-locals-size @minus{} new-locals-size
@end format
The second @code{lp+!#} adjusts the locals stack pointer from the level at
the @i{orig} point to the level after the @code{THEN}. The first
@code{lp+!#} adjusts the locals stack pointer from the current level to the
level at the orig point, so the complete effect is an adjustment from the
current level to the right level after the @code{THEN}.

@cindex locals information on the control-flow stack
@cindex control-flow stack items, locals information
In a conventional Forth implementation a dest control-flow stack entry is
just the target address and an orig entry is just the address to be
patched. Our locals implementation adds a word list to every orig or dest
item. It is the list of locals visible (or assumed visible) at the point
described by the entry. Our implementation also adds a tag to identify the
kind of entry, in particular to differentiate between live and dead
(reachable and unreachable) orig entries.

A few unusual operations have to be performed on locals word lists:

@findex common-list ( @var{ list1 list2 -- list3   } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{common-list}
@kindex common-list
@format
@code{common-list} ( @i{list1 list2 -- list3  }) gforth-internal ``common-list''
@end format

@findex sub-list? ( @var{ list1 list2 -- f   } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{sub-list?}
@kindex sub-list?
@format
@code{sub-list?} ( @i{list1 list2 -- f  }) gforth-internal ``sub-list?''
@end format

@findex list-size ( @var{ list -- u   } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{list-size}
@kindex list-size
@format
@code{list-size} ( @i{list -- u  }) gforth-internal ``list-size''
@end format



Several features of our locals word list implementation make these
operations easy to implement: The locals word lists are organised as linked
lists; the tails of these lists are shared, if the lists contain some of the
same locals; and the address of a name is greater than the address of the
names behind it in the list.

Another important implementation detail is the variable @code{dead-code}. It
is used by @code{BEGIN} and @code{THEN} to determine if they can be reached
directly or only through the branch that they resolve. @code{dead-code} is
set by @code{UNREACHABLE}, @code{AHEAD}, @code{EXIT} etc., and cleared at
the start of a colon definition, by @code{BEGIN} and usually by @code{THEN}.

Counted loops are similar to other loops in most respects, but @code{LEAVE}
requires special attention: It performs basically the same service as
@code{AHEAD}, but it does not create a control-flow stack entry. Therefore
the information has to be stored elsewhere; traditionally, the information
was stored in the target fields of the branches created by the
@code{LEAVE}s, by organizing these fields into a linked list. Unfortunately,
this clever trick does not provide enough space for storing our extended
control flow information. Therefore, we introduce another stack, the leave
stack. It contains the control-flow stack entries for all unresolved
@code{LEAVE}s.

Local names are kept until the end of the colon definition, even if they are
no longer visible in any control-flow path. In a few cases this may lead to
increased space needs for the locals name area, but usually less than
reclaiming this space would cost in code size.

@node Closures, , Locals implementation, Gforth locals
@subsubsection Closures
@cindex closures

Gforth also provides basic closures.  A closure is a combination of a
quotation (@pxref{Quotations}) and locals.  Gforth's closures have locals
which are filled with values at the closure's run-time, producing a
trampoline xt.  When executing that trampoline xt, the closure's code is
executed, with access to the closure's locals on the locals stack.
Modifications of the closure's locals aren't persistent, i.e. when the
closure @code{EXIT}s, the modified values are lost.

@findex [@{: ( @var{ -- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{[@{:}
@kindex [@{:
@format
@code{[@{:} ( @i{-- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0  }) gforth-experimental ``start-closure''
@end format
starts a closure.  Closures first declare the locals frame they are going to
use, and then the code that is executed with those locals.  Closures end
like quotations with a @code{;]}.  The locals declaration ends depending
where the closure's locals are created.  At run-time, the closure is created
as trampolin xt, and fills the values of its local frame from the stack.  At
execution time of the xt, the local frame is copied to the locals stack, and
used inside the closure's code.  After return, those values are removed from
the locals stack, and not updated in the closure itself.


@findex :@}l ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}l}
@format
@code{:@}l} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --  }) gforth-1.0 ``close-brace-locals''
@end format
end a closure's locals declaration.  The closure will be allocated on the
local's stack.


@findex :@}d ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}d}
@format
@code{:@}d} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --  }) gforth-1.0 ``colon-close-brace-d''
@end format
end a closure's locals declaration.  The closure will be allocated in the
dictionary.


@findex :@}h ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}h}
@format
@code{:@}h} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --  }) gforth-1.0 ``colon-close-brace-h''
@end format
end a closure's locals declaration.  The closure will be allocated on the
heap.


@findex :@}h1 ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}h1}
@format
@code{:@}h1} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --  }) gforth-1.0 ``colon-close-brace-h''
@end format
end a closure's locals declaration.  The closure will be allocated on the
heap.


@findex :@}xt ( @var{ hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{:@}xt}
@format
@code{:@}xt} ( @i{hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0 a-addr1 u1 ... --  }) gforth-1.0 ``colon-close-brace-x-t''
@end format
end a closure's locals declaration.  The closure will be allocated by the xt
on the stack, so the closure's run-time stack effect is @code{( xt-alloc --
xt-closure )}.


@findex >addr ( @var{ xt -- addr   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{>addr}
@kindex >addr
@format
@code{>addr} ( @i{xt -- addr  }) gforth-experimental ``to-addr''
@end format
convert the xt of a closure on the heap to the @var{addr} with can be passed
to @code{free} to get rid of the closure


@findex free-closure ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{free-closure}
@kindex free-closure
@format
@code{free-closure} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-internal ``free-closure''
@end format
free a heap-allocated closure



@example
: foo [@{: a f: b d: c xt: d :@}d a . b f. c d. d ;] ;
5 3.3e #1234. ' cr foo execute
@end example

@code{foo} creates a closure in the dictionary with a single cell, a
floating point, a double, and an xt, and prints the first three values
before executing the xt on invocation.

This allows to implement Donald Knuth's ``Man or boy test'' proposed in 1964
to test Algol compilers.

@example
: A @{: w^ k x1 x2 x3 xt: x4 xt: x5 | w^ B :@} recursive
    k @ 0<= IF  x4 x5 f+  ELSE
        B k x1 x2 x3 action-of x4 [@{: B k x1 x2 x3 x4 :@}L
            -1 k +!
            k @ B @ x1 x2 x3 x4 A ;] dup B !
        execute  THEN ;
: man-or-boy? ( n -- ) [: 1e ;] [: -1e ;] 2dup swap [: 0e ;] A f. ;
@end example

Sometimes, closures need a permanent storage to be modified; it is even
possible that more than one closure shares that permanent storage.  In the
example above, local variables of the outer procedure are used for this, but
in some cases, the closure lives longer than the outer procedure; especially
closures allocated in the dictionary or on the heap are designed to outlive
their parent procedure.

For those, we have home locations, which are allocated like closures, but
their code is directly executed at creation and should provide us with the
addresses of the home locations.

@example
: bar ( a b c -- aaddr baddr caddr hl-addr )
    <@{: w^ a w^ b w^ c :@}h a b c ;> ;
@end example

This example creates a home location with three cells on the heap, and
returns the addresses of the three locations and the address of the home
location.  This address can be used to @code{free} the home location when it
is no longer needed.

@findex <@{: ( @var{ -- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{<@{:}
@kindex <@{:
@format
@code{<@{:} ( @i{-- hmaddr u latest latestnt wid 0  }) gforth-experimental ``start-homelocation''
@end format
starts a home location


@findex ;> ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{;>}
@kindex ;>
@format
@code{;>} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``end-homelocation''
@end format
end using a home location



@node Standard Forth locals, , Gforth locals, Locals
@subsection Standard Forth locals
@cindex locals, Standard Forth style

The Forth-2012 standard defines a syntax for locals is restricted version of
Gforth's locals:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Locals can only be cell-sized values (no type specifiers are allowed).
@item
Locals can be defined only outside control structures.
@item
Only one locals definition per definition is allowed.
@item
Locals can interfere with explicit usage of the return stack. For the exact
(and long) rules, see the standard. If you don't use return stack accessing
words in a definition using locals, you will be all right. The purpose of
this rule is to make locals implementation on the return stack easier.
@item
The whole locals definition must be in one line.
@end itemize

The Standard Forth locals wordset itself consists of two words: @code{@{:}
and:

@findex (local) ( @var{ addr u --   } ) local
@cindex @code{(local)}
@kindex (local)
@format
@code{(local)} ( @i{addr u --  }) local ``paren-local-paren''
@end format


The ANS Forth locals extension wordset defines a syntax using
@code{locals|}, but it is so awful that we strongly recommend not to use
it. We have implemented this syntax to make porting to Gforth easy, but do
not document it here. The problem with this syntax is that the locals are
defined in an order reversed with respect to the standard stack comment
notation, making programs harder to read, and easier to misread and
miswrite. The only merit of this syntax is that it is easy to implement
using the ANS Forth locals wordset, but then, so is the @code{@{:} syntax.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------
@node Structures, Object-oriented Forth, Locals, Words
@section Structures
@cindex structures
@cindex records

This section presents the structure package that comes with Gforth. A
version of the package implemented in Standard Forth is available in
@file{compat/struct.fs}. This package was inspired by a posting on
comp.lang.forth in 1989 (unfortunately I don't remember, by whom; possibly
John Hayes). A version of this section has been published in M. Anton Ertl,
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/objects/structs.html, Yet
Another Forth Structures Package}, Forth Dimensions 19(3), pages
13--16. Marcel Hendrix provided helpful comments.

@menu
* Why explicit structure support?::
* Structure Usage::
* Structure Naming Convention::
* Structure Implementation::
* Structure Glossary::
* Forth200x Structures::     
@end menu

@node Why explicit structure support?, Structure Usage, Structures, Structures
@subsection Why explicit structure support?

@cindex address arithmetic for structures
@cindex structures using address arithmetic
If we want to use a structure containing several fields, we could simply
reserve memory for it, and access the fields using address arithmetic
(@pxref{Address arithmetic}). As an example, consider a structure with the
following fields

@table @code
@item a
is a float
@item b
is a cell
@item c
is a float
@end table

Given the (float-aligned) base address of the structure we get the address
of the field

@table @code
@item a
without doing anything further.
@item b
with @code{float+}
@item c
with @code{float+ cell+ faligned}
@end table

It is easy to see that this can become quite tiring. 

Moreover, it is not very readable, because seeing a @code{cell+} tells us
neither which kind of structure is accessed nor what field is accessed; we
have to somehow infer the kind of structure, and then look up in the
documentation, which field of that structure corresponds to that offset.

Finally, this kind of address arithmetic also causes maintenance troubles:
If you add or delete a field somewhere in the middle of the structure, you
have to find and change all computations for the fields afterwards.

So, instead of using @code{cell+} and friends directly, how about storing
the offsets in constants:

@example
0 constant a-offset
0 float+ constant b-offset
0 float+ cell+ faligned c-offset
@end example

Now we can get the address of field @code{x} with @code{x-offset +}. This is
much better in all respects. Of course, you still have to change all later
offset definitions if you add a field. You can fix this by declaring the
offsets in the following way:

@example
0 constant a-offset
a-offset float+ constant b-offset
b-offset cell+ faligned constant c-offset
@end example

Since we always use the offsets with @code{+}, we could use a defining word
@code{cfield} that includes the @code{+} in the action of the defined word:

@example
: cfield ( n "name" -- )
    create ,
does> ( name execution: addr1 -- addr2 )
    @@ + ;

0 cfield a
0 a float+ cfield b
0 b cell+ faligned cfield c
@end example

Instead of @code{x-offset +}, we now simply write @code{x}.

The structure field words now can be used quite nicely. However, their
definition is still a bit cumbersome: We have to repeat the name, the
information about size and alignment is distributed before and after the
field definitions etc.  The structure package presented here addresses these
problems.

@node Structure Usage, Structure Naming Convention, Why explicit structure support?, Structures
@subsection Structure Usage
@cindex structure usage

@cindex @code{field} usage
@cindex @code{struct} usage
@cindex @code{end-struct} usage
You can define a structure for a (data-less) linked list with:
@example
struct
    cell% field list-next
end-struct list%
@end example

With the address of the list node on the stack, you can compute the address
of the field that contains the address of the next node with
@code{list-next}. E.g., you can determine the length of a list with:

@example
: list-length ( list -- n )
\ "list" is a pointer to the first element of a linked list
\ "n" is the length of the list
    0 BEGIN ( list1 n1 )
        over
    WHILE ( list1 n1 )
        1+ swap list-next @@ swap
    REPEAT
    nip ;
@end example

You can reserve memory for a list node in the dictionary with @code{list%
%allot}, which leaves the address of the list node on the stack. For the
equivalent allocation on the heap you can use @code{list% %alloc} (or, for
an @code{allocate}-like stack effect (i.e., with ior), use @code{list%
%allocate}). You can get the the size of a list node with @code{list% %size}
and its alignment with @code{list% %alignment}.

Note that in Standard Forth the body of a @code{create}d word is
@code{aligned} but not necessarily @code{faligned}; therefore, if you do a:

@example
create @emph{name} foo% %allot drop
@end example

@noindent
then the memory alloted for @code{foo%} is guaranteed to start at the body
of @code{@emph{name}} only if @code{foo%} contains only character, cell and
double fields.  Therefore, if your structure contains floats, better use

@example
foo% %allot constant @emph{name}
@end example

@cindex structures containing structures
You can include a structure @code{foo%} as a field of another structure,
like this:
@example
struct
...
    foo% field ...
...
end-struct ...
@end example

@cindex structure extension
@cindex extended records
Instead of starting with an empty structure, you can extend an existing
structure. E.g., a plain linked list without data, as defined above, is
hardly useful; You can extend it to a linked list of integers, like
this:@footnote{This feature is also known as @emph{extended records}. It is
the main innovation in the Oberon language; in other words, adding this
feature to Modula-2 led Wirth to create a new language, write a new compiler
etc.  Adding this feature to Forth just required a few lines of code.}

@example
list%
    cell% field intlist-int
end-struct intlist%
@end example

@code{intlist%} is a structure with two fields: @code{list-next} and
@code{intlist-int}.

@cindex structures containing arrays
You can specify an array type containing @emph{n} elements of type
@code{foo%} like this:

@example
foo% @emph{n} *
@end example

You can use this array type in any place where you can use a normal type,
e.g., when defining a @code{field}, or with @code{%allot}.

@cindex first field optimization
The first field is at the base address of a structure and the word for this
field (e.g., @code{list-next}) actually does not change the address on the
stack. You may be tempted to leave it away in the interest of run-time and
space efficiency. This is not necessary, because the structure package
optimizes this case: If you compile a first-field words, no code is
generated. So, in the interest of readability and maintainability you should
include the word for the field when accessing the field.


@node Structure Naming Convention, Structure Implementation, Structure Usage, Structures
@subsection Structure Naming Convention
@cindex structure naming convention

The field names that come to (my) mind are often quite generic, and, if
used, would cause frequent name clashes. E.g., many structures probably
contain a @code{counter} field. The structure names that come to (my) mind
are often also the logical choice for the names of words that create such a
structure.

Therefore, I have adopted the following naming conventions: 

@itemize @bullet
@cindex field naming convention
@item
The names of fields are of the form @code{@emph{struct}-@emph{field}}, where
@code{@emph{struct}} is the basic name of the structure, and
@code{@emph{field}} is the basic name of the field. You can think of field
words as converting the (address of the)  structure into the (address of
the) field.

@cindex structure naming convention
@item
The names of structures are of the form @code{@emph{struct}%}, where
@code{@emph{struct}} is the basic name of the structure.
@end itemize

This naming convention does not work that well for fields of extended
structures; e.g., the integer list structure has a field @code{intlist-int},
but has @code{list-next}, not @code{intlist-next}.

@node Structure Implementation, Structure Glossary, Structure Naming Convention, Structures
@subsection Structure Implementation
@cindex structure implementation
@cindex implementation of structures

The central idea in the implementation is to pass the data about the
structure being built on the stack, not in some global variable. Everything
else falls into place naturally once this design decision is made.

The type description on the stack is of the form @emph{align size}. Keeping
the size on the top-of-stack makes dealing with arrays very simple.

@code{field} is a defining word that uses @code{Create} and
@code{DOES>}. The body of the field contains the offset of the field, and
the normal @code{DOES>} action is simply:

@example
@@ +
@end example

@noindent
i.e., add the offset to the address, giving the stack effect @i{addr1 --
addr2} for a field.

@cindex first field optimization, implementation
This simple structure is slightly complicated by the optimization for fields
with offset 0, which requires a different @code{DOES>}-part (because we
cannot rely on there being something on the stack if such a field is invoked
during compilation). Therefore, we put the different @code{DOES>}-parts in
separate words, and decide which one to invoke based on the offset. For a
zero offset, the field is basically a noop; it is immediate, and therefore
no code is generated when it is compiled.

@node Structure Glossary, Forth200x Structures, Structure Implementation, Structures
@subsection Structure Glossary
@cindex structure glossary


@findex %align ( @var{ align size --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%align}
@kindex %align
@format
@code{%align} ( @i{align size --  }) gforth-0.4 ``%align''
@end format
Align the data space pointer to the alignment @var{align}. 


@findex %alignment ( @var{ align size -- align   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%alignment}
@kindex %alignment
@format
@code{%alignment} ( @i{align size -- align  }) gforth-0.4 ``%alignment''
@end format
The alignment of the structure.


@findex %alloc ( @var{ align size -- addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%alloc}
@kindex %alloc
@format
@code{%alloc} ( @i{align size -- addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``%alloc''
@end format
Allocate @var{size} address units with alignment @var{align}, giving a data
block at @var{addr}; @code{throw} an ior code if not successful.


@findex %allocate ( @var{ align size -- addr ior   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%allocate}
@kindex %allocate
@format
@code{%allocate} ( @i{align size -- addr ior  }) gforth-0.4 ``%allocate''
@end format
Allocate @var{size} address units with alignment @var{align}, similar to
@code{allocate}.


@findex %allot ( @var{ align size -- addr   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%allot}
@kindex %allot
@format
@code{%allot} ( @i{align size -- addr  }) gforth-0.4 ``%allot''
@end format
Allot @var{size} address units of data space with alignment @var{align}; the
resulting block of data is found at @var{addr}.


@findex cell% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{cell%}
@kindex cell%
@format
@code{cell%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``cell%''
@end format

@findex char% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{char%}
@kindex char%
@format
@code{char%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``char%''
@end format

@findex dfloat% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{dfloat%}
@kindex dfloat%
@format
@code{dfloat%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``dfloat%''
@end format

@findex double% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{double%}
@kindex double%
@format
@code{double%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``double%''
@end format

@findex end-struct ( @var{ align size "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{end-struct}
@kindex end-struct
@format
@code{end-struct} ( @i{align size "name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``end-struct''
@end format
Define a structure/type descriptor @var{name} with alignment @var{align} and
size @var{size1} (@var{size} rounded up to be a multiple of @var{align}).@*
@code{name} execution: -- @var{align size1}@*


@findex field ( @var{ align1 offset1 align size "name" --  align2 offset2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{field}
@kindex field
@format
@code{field} ( @i{align1 offset1 align size "name" --  align2 offset2  }) gforth-0.2 ``field''
@end format
Create a field @var{name} with offset @var{offset1}, and the type given by
@var{align size}. @var{offset2} is the offset of the next field, and
@var{align2} is the alignment of all fields.@* @code{name} execution:
@var{addr1} -- @var{addr2}.@* @var{addr2}=@var{addr1}+@var{offset1}


@findex float% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{float%}
@kindex float%
@format
@code{float%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``float%''
@end format

@findex sfloat% ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{sfloat%}
@kindex sfloat%
@format
@code{sfloat%} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.4 ``sfloat%''
@end format

@findex %size ( @var{ align size -- size   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{%size}
@kindex %size
@format
@code{%size} ( @i{align size -- size  }) gforth-0.4 ``%size''
@end format
The size of the structure.


@findex struct ( @var{ -- align size   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{struct}
@kindex struct
@format
@code{struct} ( @i{-- align size  }) gforth-0.2 ``struct''
@end format
An empty structure, used to start a structure definition.




@node Forth200x Structures, , Structure Glossary, Structures
@subsection Forth200x Structures
@cindex Structures in Forth200x

The Forth 2012 standard defines a slightly less convenient form of
structures.  In general (when using @code{field+}, you have to perform the
alignment yourself, but there are a number of convenience words (e.g.,
@code{field:}) that include alignment.

A typical usage example is:

@example
0
  field:                   s-a
  faligned 2 floats +field s-b
constant s-struct
@end example

An alternative way of writing this structure is:

@example
begin-structure s-struct
  field:                   s-a
  faligned 2 floats +field s-b
end-structure
@end example

You can define a structure that has the same fields and additional fields as
follows:

@example
s-struct
  cfield: t-c
  cfield: t-d
constant t-struct
@end example

or alternatively

@example
s-struct extend-structure t-struct
  cfield: t-c
  cfield: t-d
end-structure
@end example

@findex begin-structure ( @var{ "name" -- struct-sys 0   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{begin-structure}
@kindex begin-structure
@format
@code{begin-structure} ( @i{"name" -- struct-sys 0  }) facility-ext ``begin-structure''
@end format

@findex extend-structure ( @var{ n "name" -- struct-sys n   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{extend-structure}
@kindex extend-structure
@format
@code{extend-structure} ( @i{n "name" -- struct-sys n  }) gforth-1.0 ``extend-structure''
@end format
Start a new structure @i{name} as extension of an existing structure with
size @i{n}.


@findex end-structure ( @var{ struct-sys +n --   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{end-structure}
@kindex end-structure
@format
@code{end-structure} ( @i{struct-sys +n --  }) facility-ext ``end-structure''
@end format
end a structure started wioth @code{begin-structure}


@findex +field ( @var{ noffset1 nsize "name" -- noffset2   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{+field}
@kindex +field
@format
@code{+field} ( @i{noffset1 nsize "name" -- noffset2  }) facility-ext ``plus-field''
@end format
Defining word; defines @i{name} @code{( addr1 -- addr2 )}, where @i{addr2}
is @i{addr1+noffset1}.  @i{noffset2} is @i{noffset1+nsize}.


@findex cfield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{cfield:}
@kindex cfield:
@format
@code{cfield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) facility-ext ``c-field-colon''
@end format
Define a char-sized field


@findex field: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{field:}
@kindex field:
@format
@code{field:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) facility-ext ``field-colon''
@end format
Define an aligned cell-sized field


@findex 2field: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{2field:}
@kindex 2field:
@format
@code{2field:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) gforth-0.7 ``two-field-colon''
@end format
Define an aligned double-cell-sized field


@findex ffield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{ffield:}
@kindex ffield:
@format
@code{ffield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) floating-ext ``f-field-colon''
@end format
Define a faligned float-sized field


@findex sffield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{sffield:}
@kindex sffield:
@format
@code{sffield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) floating-ext ``s-f-field-colon''
@end format
Define a sfaligned sfloat-sized field


@findex dffield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) floating-ext
@cindex @code{dffield:}
@kindex dffield:
@format
@code{dffield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) floating-ext ``d-f-field-colon''
@end format
Define a dfaligned dfloat-sized field


@findex wfield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{wfield:}
@kindex wfield:
@format
@code{wfield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``w-field-colon''
@end format
Define a naturally aligned field for a 16-bit value.


@findex lfield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{lfield:}
@kindex lfield:
@format
@code{lfield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``l-field-colon''
@end format
Define a naturally aligned field for a 32-bit value.


@findex xfield: ( @var{ u1 "name" -- u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xfield:}
@kindex xfield:
@format
@code{xfield:} ( @i{u1 "name" -- u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``x-field-colon''
@end format
Define a naturally aligned field for a 64-bit-value.



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Object-oriented Forth, Regular Expressions, Structures, Words
@section Object-oriented Forth

Gforth comes with three packages for object-oriented programming:
@file{objects.fs}, @file{oof.fs}, and @file{mini-oof.fs}; none of them is
preloaded, so you have to @code{include} them before use. The most important
differences between these packages (and others) are discussed in
@ref{Comparison with other object models}. All packages are written in
Standard Forth and can be used with any other Standard Forth.

@menu
* Why object-oriented programming?::
* Object-Oriented Terminology::
* Objects::
* OOF::
* Mini-OOF::
* Mini-OOF2::
* Comparison with other object models::  
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Why object-oriented programming?, Object-Oriented Terminology, Object-oriented Forth, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection Why object-oriented programming?
@cindex object-oriented programming motivation
@cindex motivation for object-oriented programming

@comment TODO add some other operations eg perimeter, area
@comment and tie in to concrete examples later..
Often we have to deal with several data structures (@emph{objects}), that
have to be treated similarly in some respects, but differently in
others. Graphical objects are the textbook example: circles, triangles,
dinosaurs, icons, and others, and we may want to add more during program
development. We want to apply some operations to any graphical object, e.g.,
@code{draw} for displaying it on the screen. However, @code{draw} has to do
something different for every kind of object.

We could implement @code{draw} as a big @code{CASE} control structure that
executes the appropriate code depending on the kind of object to be
drawn. This would be not be very elegant, and, moreover, we would have to
change @code{draw} every time we add a new kind of graphical object (say, a
spaceship).

What we would rather do is: When defining spaceships, we would tell the
system: ``Here's how you @code{draw} a spaceship; you figure out the rest''.

@comment TODO ?list properties of oo systems.. oo vs o-based?
This is the problem that all systems solve that (rightfully) call themselves
object-oriented; the object-oriented packages presented here solve this
problem (and not much else).

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Object-Oriented Terminology, Objects, Why object-oriented programming?, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection Object-Oriented Terminology
@cindex object-oriented terminology
@cindex terminology for object-oriented programming

This section is mainly for reference, so you don't have to understand all of
it right away.  The terminology is mainly Smalltalk-inspired.  In short:

@table @emph
@cindex class
@item class
a data structure definition with some extras.

@cindex object
@item object
an instance of the data structure described by the class definition.

@cindex instance variables
@item instance variables
fields of the data structure.

@cindex selector
@cindex method selector
@cindex virtual function
@item selector
(or @emph{method selector}) a word (e.g., @code{draw}) that performs an
operation on a variety of data structures (classes). A selector describes
@emph{what} operation to perform. In C++ terminology: a (pure) virtual
function.

@cindex method
@item method
the concrete definition that performs the operation described by the
selector for a specific class. A method specifies @emph{how} the operation
is performed for a specific class.

@cindex selector invocation
@cindex message send
@cindex invoking a selector
@item selector invocation
a call of a selector. One argument of the call (the TOS (top-of-stack))  is
used for determining which method is used. In Smalltalk terminology: a
message (consisting of the selector and the other arguments) is sent to the
object.

@cindex receiving object
@item receiving object
the object used for determining the method executed by a selector
invocation. In the @file{objects.fs} model, it is the object that is on the
TOS when the selector is invoked. (@emph{Receiving} comes from the Smalltalk
@emph{message} terminology.)

@cindex child class
@cindex parent class
@cindex inheritance
@item child class
a class that has (@emph{inherits}) all properties (instance variables,
selectors, methods) from a @emph{parent class}. In Smalltalk terminology:
The subclass inherits from the superclass. In C++ terminology: The derived
class inherits from the base class.

@end table

@c If you wonder about the message sending terminology, it comes from
@c a time when each object had it's own task and objects communicated via
@c message passing; eventually the Smalltalk developers realized that
@c they can do most things through simple (indirect) calls. They kept the
@c terminology.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------
@node Objects, OOF, Object-Oriented Terminology, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection The @file{objects.fs} model
@cindex objects
@cindex object-oriented programming

@cindex @file{objects.fs}
@cindex @file{oof.fs}

@c McKewan's and Zsoter's packages
This section describes the @file{objects.fs} package. This material also has
been published in M. Anton Ertl,
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/objects/objects.html,
Yet Another Forth Objects Package}}, Forth Dimensions 19(2), pages 37--43.

This section assumes that you have read @ref{Structures}.

The techniques on which this model is based have been used to implement the
parser generator, Gray, and have also been used in Gforth for implementing
the various flavours of word lists (hashed or not, case-sensitive or not,
special-purpose word lists for locals etc.).


@menu
* Properties of the Objects model::
* Basic Objects Usage::
* The Objects base class::
* Creating objects::
* Object-Oriented Programming Style::
* Class Binding::
* Method conveniences::
* Classes and Scoping::
* Dividing classes::
* Object Interfaces::
* Objects Implementation::
* Objects Glossary::         
@end menu

Marcel Hendrix provided helpful comments on this section.

@node Properties of the Objects model, Basic Objects Usage, Objects, Objects
@subsubsection Properties of the @file{objects.fs} model
@cindex @file{objects.fs} properties

@itemize @bullet
@item
It is straightforward to pass objects on the stack. Passing selectors on the
stack is a little less convenient, but possible.

@item
Objects are just data structures in memory, and are referenced by their
address. You can create words for objects with normal defining words like
@code{constant}. Likewise, there is no difference between instance variables
that contain objects and those that contain other data.

@item
Late binding is efficient and easy to use.

@item
It avoids parsing, and thus avoids problems with state-smartness and reduced
extensibility; for convenience there are a few parsing words, but they have
non-parsing counterparts. There are also a few defining words that
parse. This is hard to avoid, because all standard defining words parse
(except @code{:noname}); however, such words are not as bad as many other
parsing words, because they are not state-smart.

@item
It does not try to incorporate everything. It does a few things and does
them well (IMO). In particular, this model was not designed to support
information hiding (although it has features that may help); you can use a
separate package for achieving this.

@item
It is layered; you don't have to learn and use all features to use this
model. Only a few features are necessary (@pxref{Basic Objects Usage},
@pxref{The Objects base class}, @pxref{Creating objects}.), the others are
optional and independent of each other.

@item
An implementation in Standard Forth is available.

@end itemize


@node Basic Objects Usage, The Objects base class, Properties of the Objects model, Objects
@subsubsection Basic @file{objects.fs} Usage
@cindex basic objects usage
@cindex objects, basic usage

You can define a class for graphical objects like this:

@cindex @code{class} usage
@cindex @code{end-class} usage
@cindex @code{selector} usage
@example
object class \ "object" is the parent class
  selector draw ( x y graphical -- )
end-class graphical
@end example

This code defines a class @code{graphical} with an operation @code{draw}.
We can perform the operation @code{draw} on any @code{graphical} object,
e.g.:

@example
100 100 t-rex draw
@end example

@noindent
where @code{t-rex} is a word (say, a constant) that produces a graphical
object.

@comment TODO add a 2nd operation eg perimeter.. and use for
@comment a concrete example

@cindex abstract class
How do we create a graphical object? With the present definitions, we cannot
create a useful graphical object. The class @code{graphical} describes
graphical objects in general, but not any concrete graphical object type
(C++ users would call it an @emph{abstract class}); e.g., there is no method
for the selector @code{draw} in the class @code{graphical}.

For concrete graphical objects, we define child classes of the class
@code{graphical}, e.g.:

@cindex @code{overrides} usage
@cindex @code{field} usage in class definition
@example
graphical class \ "graphical" is the parent class
  cell% field circle-radius

:noname ( x y circle -- )
  circle-radius @@ draw-circle ;
overrides draw

:noname ( n-radius circle -- )
  circle-radius ! ;
overrides construct

end-class circle
@end example

Here we define a class @code{circle} as a child of @code{graphical}, with
field @code{circle-radius} (which behaves just like a field
(@pxref{Structures}); it defines (using @code{overrides}) new methods for
the selectors @code{draw} and @code{construct} (@code{construct} is defined
in @code{object}, the parent class of @code{graphical}).

Now we can create a circle on the heap (i.e., @code{allocate}d memory) with:

@cindex @code{heap-new} usage
@example
50 circle heap-new constant my-circle
@end example

@noindent
@code{heap-new} invokes @code{construct}, thus initializing the field
@code{circle-radius} with 50. We can draw this new circle at (100,100) with:

@example
100 100 my-circle draw
@end example

@cindex selector invocation, restrictions
@cindex class definition, restrictions
Note: You can only invoke a selector if the object on the TOS (the receiving
object) belongs to the class where the selector was defined or one of its
descendents; e.g., you can invoke @code{draw} only for objects belonging to
@code{graphical} or its descendents (e.g., @code{circle}).  Immediately
before @code{end-class}, the search order has to be the same as immediately
after @code{class}.

@node The Objects base class, Creating objects, Basic Objects Usage, Objects
@subsubsection The @file{object.fs} base class
@cindex @code{object} class

When you define a class, you have to specify a parent class.  So how do you
start defining classes? There is one class available from the start:
@code{object}. It is ancestor for all classes and so is the only class that
has no parent. It has two selectors: @code{construct} and @code{print}.

@node Creating objects, Object-Oriented Programming Style, The Objects base class, Objects
@subsubsection Creating objects
@cindex creating objects
@cindex object creation
@cindex object allocation options

@cindex @code{heap-new} discussion
@cindex @code{dict-new} discussion
@cindex @code{construct} discussion
You can create and initialize an object of a class on the heap with
@code{heap-new} ( ... class -- object ) and in the dictionary (allocation
with @code{allot}) with @code{dict-new} ( ... class -- object ). Both words
invoke @code{construct}, which consumes the stack items indicated by "..."
above.

@cindex @code{init-object} discussion
@cindex @code{class-inst-size} discussion
If you want to allocate memory for an object yourself, you can get its
alignment and size with @code{class-inst-size 2@@} ( class -- align size
). Once you have memory for an object, you can initialize it with
@code{init-object} ( ... class object -- ); @code{construct} does only a
part of the necessary work.

@node Object-Oriented Programming Style, Class Binding, Creating objects, Objects
@subsubsection Object-Oriented Programming Style
@cindex object-oriented programming style
@cindex programming style, object-oriented

This section is not exhaustive.

@cindex stack effects of selectors
@cindex selectors and stack effects
In general, it is a good idea to ensure that all methods for the same
selector have the same stack effect: when you invoke a selector, you often
have no idea which method will be invoked, so, unless all methods have the
same stack effect, you will not know the stack effect of the selector
invocation.

One exception to this rule is methods for the selector @code{construct}. We
know which method is invoked, because we specify the class to be constructed
at the same place. Actually, I defined @code{construct} as a selector only
to give the users a convenient way to specify initialization. The way it is
used, a mechanism different from selector invocation would be more natural
(but probably would take more code and more space to explain).

@node Class Binding, Method conveniences, Object-Oriented Programming Style, Objects
@subsubsection Class Binding
@cindex class binding
@cindex early binding

@cindex late binding
Normal selector invocations determine the method at run-time depending on
the class of the receiving object. This run-time selection is called @i{late
binding}.

Sometimes it's preferable to invoke a different method. For example, you
might want to use the simple method for @code{print}ing @code{object}s
instead of the possibly long-winded @code{print} method of the receiver
class. You can achieve this by replacing the invocation of @code{print}
with:

@cindex @code{[bind]} usage
@example
[bind] object print
@end example

@noindent
in compiled code or:

@cindex @code{bind} usage
@example
bind object print
@end example

@cindex class binding, alternative to
@noindent
in interpreted code. Alternatively, you can define the method with a name
(e.g., @code{print-object}), and then invoke it through the name. Class
binding is just a (often more convenient) way to achieve the same effect; it
avoids name clutter and allows you to invoke methods directly without naming
them first.

@cindex superclass binding
@cindex parent class binding
A frequent use of class binding is this: When we define a method for a
selector, we often want the method to do what the selector does in the
parent class, and a little more. There is a special word for this purpose:
@code{[parent]}; @code{[parent] @emph{selector}} is equivalent to
@code{[bind] @emph{parent selector}}, where @code{@emph{parent}} is the
parent class of the current class. E.g., a method definition might look
like:

@cindex @code{[parent]} usage
@example
:noname
  dup [parent] foo \ do parent's foo on the receiving object
  ... \ do some more
; overrides foo
@end example

@cindex class binding as optimization
In @cite{Object-oriented programming in ANS Forth} (Forth Dimensions, March
1997), Andrew McKewan presents class binding as an optimization technique. I
recommend not using it for this purpose unless you are in an emergency. Late
binding is pretty fast with this model anyway, so the benefit of using class
binding is small; the cost of using class binding where it is not
appropriate is reduced maintainability.

While we are at programming style questions: You should bind selectors only
to ancestor classes of the receiving object. E.g., say, you know that the
receiving object is of class @code{foo} or its descendents; then you should
bind only to @code{foo} and its ancestors.

@node Method conveniences, Classes and Scoping, Class Binding, Objects
@subsubsection Method conveniences
@cindex method conveniences

In a method you usually access the receiving object pretty often.  If you
define the method as a plain colon definition (e.g., with @code{:noname}),
you may have to do a lot of stack gymnastics. To avoid this, you can define
the method with @code{m: ... ;m}. E.g., you could define the method for
@code{draw}ing a @code{circle} with

@cindex @code{this} usage
@cindex @code{m:} usage
@cindex @code{;m} usage
@example
m: ( x y circle -- )
  ( x y ) this circle-radius @@ draw-circle ;m
@end example

@cindex @code{exit} in @code{m: ... ;m}
@cindex @code{exitm} discussion
@cindex @code{catch} in @code{m: ... ;m}
When this method is executed, the receiver object is removed from the stack;
you can access it with @code{this} (admittedly, in this example the use of
@code{m: ... ;m} offers no advantage). Note that I specify the stack effect
for the whole method (i.e. including the receiver object), not just for the
code between @code{m:} and @code{;m}. You cannot use @code{exit} in
@code{m:...;m}; instead, use @code{exitm}.@footnote{Moreover, for any word
that calls @code{catch} and was defined before loading @code{objects.fs},
you have to redefine it like I redefined @code{catch}: @code{: catch this >r
catch r> to-this ;}}

@cindex @code{inst-var} usage
You will frequently use sequences of the form @code{this @emph{field}} (in
the example above: @code{this circle-radius}). If you use the field only in
this way, you can define it with @code{inst-var} and eliminate the
@code{this} before the field name. E.g., the @code{circle} class above could
also be defined with:

@example
graphical class
  cell% inst-var radius

m: ( x y circle -- )
  radius @@ draw-circle ;m
overrides draw

m: ( n-radius circle -- )
  radius ! ;m
overrides construct

end-class circle
@end example

@code{radius} can only be used in @code{circle} and its descendent classes
and inside @code{m:...;m}.

@cindex @code{inst-value} usage
You can also define fields with @code{inst-value}, which is to
@code{inst-var} what @code{value} is to @code{variable}.  You can change the
value of such a field with @code{[to-inst]}.  E.g., we could also define the
class @code{circle} like this:

@example
graphical class
  inst-value radius

m: ( x y circle -- )
  radius draw-circle ;m
overrides draw

m: ( n-radius circle -- )
  [to-inst] radius ;m
overrides construct

end-class circle
@end example

@c !! :m is easy to confuse with m:.  Another name would be better.

@c Finally, you can define named methods with @code{:m}.  One use of this
@c feature is the definition of words that occur only in one class and are
@c not intended to be overridden, but which still need method context
@c (e.g., for accessing @code{inst-var}s).  Another use is for methods that
@c would be bound frequently, if defined anonymously.


@node Classes and Scoping, Dividing classes, Method conveniences, Objects
@subsubsection Classes and Scoping
@cindex classes and scoping
@cindex scoping and classes

Inheritance is frequent, unlike structure extension. This exacerbates the
problem with the field name convention (@pxref{Structure Naming
Convention}): One always has to remember in which class the field was
originally defined; changing a part of the class structure would require
changes for renaming in otherwise unaffected code.

@cindex @code{inst-var} visibility
@cindex @code{inst-value} visibility
To solve this problem, I added a scoping mechanism (which was not in my
original charter): A field defined with @code{inst-var} (or
@code{inst-value}) is visible only in the class where it is defined and in
the descendent classes of this class.  Using such fields only makes sense in
@code{m:}-defined methods in these classes anyway.

This scoping mechanism allows us to use the unadorned field name, because
name clashes with unrelated words become much less likely.

@cindex @code{protected} discussion
@cindex @code{private} discussion
Once we have this mechanism, we can also use it for controlling the
visibility of other words: All words defined after @code{protected} are
visible only in the current class and its descendents. @code{public}
restores the compilation (i.e. @code{current}) word list that was in effect
before. If you have several @code{protected}s without an intervening
@code{public} or @code{set-current}, @code{public} will restore the
compilation word list in effect before the first of these @code{protected}s.

@node Dividing classes, Object Interfaces, Classes and Scoping, Objects
@subsubsection Dividing classes
@cindex Dividing classes
@cindex @code{methods}...@code{end-methods}

You may want to do the definition of methods separate from the definition of
the class, its selectors, fields, and instance variables, i.e., separate the
implementation from the definition.  You can do this in the following way:

@example
graphical class
  inst-value radius
end-class circle

... \ do some other stuff

circle methods \ now we are ready

m: ( x y circle -- )
  radius draw-circle ;m
overrides draw

m: ( n-radius circle -- )
  [to-inst] radius ;m
overrides construct

end-methods
@end example

You can use several @code{methods}...@code{end-methods} sections.  The only
things you can do to the class in these sections are: defining methods, and
overriding the class's selectors.  You must not define new selectors or
fields.

Note that you often have to override a selector before using it.  In
particular, you usually have to override @code{construct} with a new method
before you can invoke @code{heap-new} and friends.  E.g., you must not
create a circle before the @code{overrides construct} sequence in the
example above.

@node Object Interfaces, Objects Implementation, Dividing classes, Objects
@subsubsection Object Interfaces
@cindex object interfaces
@cindex interfaces for objects

In this model you can only call selectors defined in the class of the
receiving objects or in one of its ancestors. If you call a selector with a
receiving object that is not in one of these classes, the result is
undefined; if you are lucky, the program crashes immediately.

@cindex selectors common to hardly-related classes
Now consider the case when you want to have a selector (or several)
available in two classes: You would have to add the selector to a common
ancestor class, in the worst case to @code{object}. You may not want to do
this, e.g., because someone else is responsible for this ancestor class.

The solution for this problem is interfaces. An interface is a collection of
selectors. If a class implements an interface, the selectors become
available to the class and its descendents. A class can implement an
unlimited number of interfaces. For the problem discussed above, we would
define an interface for the selector(s), and both classes would implement
the interface.

As an example, consider an interface @code{storage} for writing objects to
disk and getting them back, and a class @code{foo} that implements it. The
code would look like this:

@cindex @code{interface} usage
@cindex @code{end-interface} usage
@cindex @code{implementation} usage
@example
interface
  selector write ( file object -- )
  selector read1 ( file object -- )
end-interface storage

bar class
  storage implementation

... overrides write
... overrides read1
...
end-class foo
@end example

@noindent
(I would add a word @code{read} @i{( file -- object )} that uses
@code{read1} internally, but that's beyond the point illustrated here.)

Note that you cannot use @code{protected} in an interface; and of course you
cannot define fields.

In the Neon model, all selectors are available for all classes; therefore it
does not need interfaces. The price you pay in this model is slower late
binding, and therefore, added complexity to avoid late binding.

@node Objects Implementation, Objects Glossary, Object Interfaces, Objects
@subsubsection @file{objects.fs} Implementation
@cindex @file{objects.fs} implementation

@cindex @code{object-map} discussion
An object is a piece of memory, like one of the data structures described
with @code{struct...end-struct}. It has a field @code{object-map} that
points to the method map for the object's class.

@cindex method map
@cindex virtual function table
The @emph{method map}@footnote{This is Self terminology; in C++ terminology:
virtual function table.} is an array that contains the execution tokens
(@i{xt}s) of the methods for the object's class. Each selector contains an
offset into a method map.

@cindex @code{selector} implementation, class
@code{selector} is a defining word that uses @code{CREATE} and
@code{DOES>}. The body of the selector contains the offset; the @code{DOES>}
action for a class selector is, basically:

@example
( object addr ) @@ over object-map @@ + @@ execute
@end example

Since @code{object-map} is the first field of the object, it does not
generate any code. As you can see, calling a selector has a small, constant
cost.

@cindex @code{current-interface} discussion
@cindex class implementation and representation
A class is basically a @code{struct} combined with a method map. During the
class definition the alignment and size of the class are passed on the
stack, just as with @code{struct}s, so @code{field} can also be used for
defining class fields. However, passing more items on the stack would be
inconvenient, so @code{class} builds a data structure in memory, which is
accessed through the variable @code{current-interface}. After its definition
is complete, the class is represented on the stack by a pointer (e.g., as
parameter for a child class definition).

A new class starts off with the alignment and size of its parent, and a copy
of the parent's method map. Defining new fields extends the size and
alignment; likewise, defining new selectors extends the method
map. @code{overrides} just stores a new @i{xt} in the method map at the
offset given by the selector.

@cindex class binding, implementation
Class binding just gets the @i{xt} at the offset given by the selector from
the class's method map and @code{compile,}s (in the case of @code{[bind]})
it.

@cindex @code{this} implementation
@cindex @code{catch} and @code{this}
@cindex @code{this} and @code{catch}
I implemented @code{this} as a @code{value}. At the start of an
@code{m:...;m} method the old @code{this} is stored to the return stack and
restored at the end; and the object on the TOS is stored @code{TO
this}. This technique has one disadvantage: If the user does not leave the
method via @code{;m}, but via @code{throw} or @code{exit}, @code{this} is
not restored (and @code{exit} may crash). To deal with the @code{throw}
problem, I have redefined @code{catch} to save and restore @code{this}; the
same should be done with any word that can catch an exception. As for
@code{exit}, I simply forbid it (as a replacement, there is @code{exitm}).

@cindex @code{inst-var} implementation
@code{inst-var} is just the same as @code{field}, with a different
@code{DOES>} action:
@example
@@ this +
@end example
Similar for @code{inst-value}.

@cindex class scoping implementation
Each class also has a word list that contains the words defined with
@code{inst-var} and @code{inst-value}, and its protected words. It also has
a pointer to its parent. @code{class} pushes the word lists of the class and
all its ancestors onto the search order stack, and @code{end-class} drops
them.

@cindex interface implementation
An interface is like a class without fields, parent and protected words;
i.e., it just has a method map. If a class implements an interface, its
method map contains a pointer to the method map of the interface. The
positive offsets in the map are reserved for class methods, therefore
interface map pointers have negative offsets. Interfaces have offsets that
are unique throughout the system, unlike class selectors, whose offsets are
only unique for the classes where the selector is available (invokable).

This structure means that interface selectors have to perform one
indirection more than class selectors to find their method. Their body
contains the interface map pointer offset in the class method map, and the
method offset in the interface method map. The @code{does>} action for an
interface selector is, basically:

@example
( object selector-body )
2dup selector-interface @@ ( object selector-body object interface-offset )
swap object-map @@ + @@ ( object selector-body map )
swap selector-offset @@ + @@ execute
@end example

where @code{object-map} and @code{selector-offset} are first fields and
generate no code.

As a concrete example, consider the following code:

@example
interface
  selector if1sel1
  selector if1sel2
end-interface if1

object class
  if1 implementation
  selector cl1sel1
  cell% inst-var cl1iv1

' m1 overrides construct
' m2 overrides if1sel1
' m3 overrides if1sel2
' m4 overrides cl1sel2
end-class cl1

create obj1 object dict-new drop
create obj2 cl1    dict-new drop
@end example

@comment TODO add this diagram..
The data structure created by this code (including the data structure for
@code{object}) is shown in the @uref{objects-implementation.eps,figure},
assuming a cell size of 4.

@node Objects Glossary, , Objects Implementation, Objects
@subsubsection @file{objects.fs} Glossary
@cindex @file{objects.fs} Glossary


@findex bind ( @var{ ... "class" "selector" -- ...   } ) objects
@cindex @code{bind}
@kindex bind
@format
@code{bind} ( @i{... "class" "selector" -- ...  }) objects ``bind''
@end format
Execute the method for @var{selector} in @var{class}.


@findex <bind> ( @var{ class selector-xt -- xt   } ) objects
@cindex @code{<bind>}
@kindex <bind>
@format
@code{<bind>} ( @i{class selector-xt -- xt  }) objects ``<bind>''
@end format
@var{xt} is the method for the selector @var{selector-xt} in @var{class}.


@findex bind' ( @var{ "class" "selector" -- xt   } ) objects
@cindex @code{bind'}
@kindex bind'
@format
@code{bind'} ( @i{"class" "selector" -- xt  }) objects ``bind'''
@end format
@var{xt} is the method for @var{selector} in @var{class}.


@findex [bind] ( @var{ compile-time: "class" "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...   } ) objects
@cindex @code{[bind]}
@kindex [bind]
@format
@code{[bind]} ( @i{compile-time: "class" "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...  }) objects ``[bind]''
@end format
Compile the method for @var{selector} in @var{class}.


@findex class ( @var{ parent-class -- align offset   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class}
@kindex class
@format
@code{class} ( @i{parent-class -- align offset  }) objects ``class''
@end format
Start a new class definition as a child of @var{parent-class}. @var{align
offset} are for use by @var{field} etc.


@findex class->map ( @var{ class -- map   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class->map}
@kindex class->map
@format
@code{class->map} ( @i{class -- map  }) objects ``class->map''
@end format
@var{map} is the pointer to @var{class}'s method map; it points to the place
in the map to which the selector offsets refer (i.e., where
@var{object-map}s point to).


@findex class-inst-size ( @var{ class -- addr   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class-inst-size}
@kindex class-inst-size
@format
@code{class-inst-size} ( @i{class -- addr  }) objects ``class-inst-size''
@end format
Give the size specification for an instance (i.e. an object)  of
@var{class}; used as @code{class-inst-size 2@ ( class -- align size )}.


@findex class-override! ( @var{ xt sel-xt class-map --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class-override!}
@kindex class-override!
@format
@code{class-override!} ( @i{xt sel-xt class-map --  }) objects ``class-override!''
@end format
@var{xt} is the new method for the selector @var{sel-xt} in @var{class-map}.


@findex class-previous ( @var{ class --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class-previous}
@kindex class-previous
@format
@code{class-previous} ( @i{class --  }) objects ``class-previous''
@end format
Drop @var{class}'s wordlists from the search order. No checking is made
whether @var{class}'s wordlists are actually on the search order.


@findex class>order ( @var{ class --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{class>order}
@kindex class>order
@format
@code{class>order} ( @i{class --  }) objects ``class>order''
@end format
Add @var{class}'s wordlists to the head of the search-order.


@findex construct ( @var{ ... object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{construct}
@kindex construct
@format
@code{construct} ( @i{... object --  }) objects ``construct''
@end format
Initialize the data fields of @var{object}. The method for the class
@var{object} just does nothing: @code{( object -- )}.


@findex current' ( @var{ "selector" -- xt   } ) objects
@cindex @code{current'}
@kindex current'
@format
@code{current'} ( @i{"selector" -- xt  }) objects ``current'''
@end format
@var{xt} is the method for @var{selector} in the current class.


@findex [current] ( @var{ compile-time: "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...   } ) objects
@cindex @code{[current]}
@kindex [current]
@format
@code{[current]} ( @i{compile-time: "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...  }) objects ``[current]''
@end format
Compile the method for @var{selector} in the current class.


@findex current-interface ( @var{ -- addr   } ) objects
@cindex @code{current-interface}
@kindex current-interface
@format
@code{current-interface} ( @i{-- addr  }) objects ``current-interface''
@end format
Variable: contains the class or interface currently being defined.


@findex dict-new ( @var{ ... class -- object   } ) objects
@cindex @code{dict-new}
@kindex dict-new
@format
@code{dict-new} ( @i{... class -- object  }) objects ``dict-new''
@end format
@code{allot} and initialize an object of class @var{class} in the
dictionary.


@findex end-class ( @var{ align offset "name" --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{end-class}
@kindex end-class
@format
@code{end-class} ( @i{align offset "name" --  }) objects ``end-class''
@end format
@var{name} execution: @code{-- class}@* End a class definition. The
resulting class is @var{class}.


@findex end-class-noname ( @var{ align offset -- class   } ) objects
@cindex @code{end-class-noname}
@kindex end-class-noname
@format
@code{end-class-noname} ( @i{align offset -- class  }) objects ``end-class-noname''
@end format
End a class definition. The resulting class is @var{class}.


@findex end-interface ( @var{ "name" --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{end-interface}
@kindex end-interface
@format
@code{end-interface} ( @i{"name" --  }) objects ``end-interface''
@end format
@code{name} execution: @code{-- interface}@* End an interface
definition. The resulting interface is @var{interface}.


@findex end-interface-noname ( @var{ -- interface   } ) objects
@cindex @code{end-interface-noname}
@kindex end-interface-noname
@format
@code{end-interface-noname} ( @i{-- interface  }) objects ``end-interface-noname''
@end format
End an interface definition. The resulting interface is @var{interface}.


@findex end-methods ( @var{ --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{end-methods}
@kindex end-methods
@format
@code{end-methods} ( @i{--  }) objects ``end-methods''
@end format
Switch back from defining methods of a class to normal mode (currently this
just restores the old search order).


@findex exitm ( @var{ --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{exitm}
@kindex exitm
@format
@code{exitm} ( @i{--  }) objects ``exitm''
@end format
@code{exit} from a method; restore old @code{this}.


@findex heap-new ( @var{ ... class -- object   } ) objects
@cindex @code{heap-new}
@kindex heap-new
@format
@code{heap-new} ( @i{... class -- object  }) objects ``heap-new''
@end format
@code{allocate} and initialize an object of class @var{class}.


@findex implementation ( @var{ interface --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{implementation}
@kindex implementation
@format
@code{implementation} ( @i{interface --  }) objects ``implementation''
@end format
The current class implements @var{interface}. I.e., you can use all
selectors of the interface in the current class and its descendents.


@findex init-object ( @var{ ... class object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{init-object}
@kindex init-object
@format
@code{init-object} ( @i{... class object --  }) objects ``init-object''
@end format
Initialize a chunk of memory (@var{object}) to an object of class
@var{class}; then performs @code{construct}.


@findex inst-value ( @var{ align1 offset1 "name" -- align2 offset2   } ) objects
@cindex @code{inst-value}
@kindex inst-value
@format
@code{inst-value} ( @i{align1 offset1 "name" -- align2 offset2  }) objects ``inst-value''
@end format
@var{name} execution: @code{-- w}@* @var{w} is the value of the field
@var{name} in @code{this} object.


@findex inst-var ( @var{ align1 offset1 align size "name" -- align2 offset2   } ) objects
@cindex @code{inst-var}
@kindex inst-var
@format
@code{inst-var} ( @i{align1 offset1 align size "name" -- align2 offset2  }) objects ``inst-var''
@end format
@var{name} execution: @code{-- addr}@* @var{addr} is the address of the
field @var{name} in @code{this} object.


@findex interface ( @var{ --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{interface}
@kindex interface
@format
@code{interface} ( @i{--  }) objects ``interface''
@end format
Start an interface definition.


@findex m: ( @var{ -- xt colon-sys; run-time: object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{m:}
@kindex m:
@format
@code{m:} ( @i{-- xt colon-sys; run-time: object --  }) objects ``m:''
@end format
Start a method definition; @var{object} becomes new @code{this}.


@findex :m ( @var{ "name" -- xt; run-time: object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{:m}
@format
@code{:m} ( @i{"name" -- xt; run-time: object --  }) objects ``:m''
@end format
Start a named method definition; @var{object} becomes new @code{this}.  Has
to be ended with @code{;m}.


@findex ;m ( @var{ colon-sys --; run-time: --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{;m}
@kindex ;m
@format
@code{;m} ( @i{colon-sys --; run-time: --  }) objects ``;m''
@end format
End a method definition; restore old @code{this}.


@findex method ( @var{ xt "name" --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{method}
@kindex method
@format
@code{method} ( @i{xt "name" --  }) objects ``method''
@end format
@code{name} execution: @code{... object -- ...}@* Create selector @var{name}
and makes @var{xt} its method in the current class.


@findex methods ( @var{ class --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{methods}
@kindex methods
@format
@code{methods} ( @i{class --  }) objects ``methods''
@end format
Makes @var{class} the current class. This is intended to be used for
defining methods to override selectors; you cannot define new fields or
selectors.


@findex object ( @var{ -- class   } ) objects
@cindex @code{object}
@kindex object
@format
@code{object} ( @i{-- class  }) objects ``object''
@end format
the ancestor of all classes.


@findex overrides ( @var{ xt "selector" --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{overrides}
@kindex overrides
@format
@code{overrides} ( @i{xt "selector" --  }) objects ``overrides''
@end format
replace default method for @var{selector} in the current class with
@var{xt}. @code{overrides} must not be used during an interface definition.


@findex [parent] ( @var{ compile-time: "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...   } ) objects
@cindex @code{[parent]}
@kindex [parent]
@format
@code{[parent]} ( @i{compile-time: "selector" -- ; run-time: ... object -- ...  }) objects ``[parent]''
@end format
Compile the method for @var{selector} in the parent of the current class.


@findex print ( @var{ object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{print}
@kindex print
@format
@code{print} ( @i{object --  }) objects ``print''
@end format
Print the object. The method for the class @var{object} prints the address
of the object and the address of its class.


@findex protected ( @var{ --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{protected}
@kindex protected
@format
@code{protected} ( @i{--  }) objects ``protected''
@end format
Set the compilation wordlist to the current class's wordlist


@findex public ( @var{ --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{public}
@kindex public
@format
@code{public} ( @i{--  }) objects ``public''
@end format
Restore the compilation wordlist that was in effect before the last
@code{protected} that actually changed the compilation wordlist.


@findex selector ( @var{ "name" --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{selector}
@kindex selector
@format
@code{selector} ( @i{"name" --  }) objects ``selector''
@end format
@var{name} execution: @code{... object -- ...}@* Create selector @var{name}
for the current class and its descendents; you can set a method for the
selector in the current class with @code{overrides}.


@findex this ( @var{ -- object   } ) objects
@cindex @code{this}
@kindex this
@format
@code{this} ( @i{-- object  }) objects ``this''
@end format
the receiving object of the current method (aka active object).


@findex <to-inst> ( @var{ w xt --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{<to-inst>}
@kindex <to-inst>
@format
@code{<to-inst>} ( @i{w xt --  }) objects ``<to-inst>''
@end format
store @var{w} into the field @var{xt} in @code{this} object.


@findex [to-inst] ( @var{ compile-time: "name" -- ; run-time: w --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{[to-inst]}
@kindex [to-inst]
@format
@code{[to-inst]} ( @i{compile-time: "name" -- ; run-time: w --  }) objects ``[to-inst]''
@end format
store @var{w} into field @var{name} in @code{this} object.


@findex to-this ( @var{ object --   } ) objects
@cindex @code{to-this}
@kindex to-this
@format
@code{to-this} ( @i{object --  }) objects ``to-this''
@end format
Set @code{this} (used internally, but useful when debugging).


@findex xt-new ( @var{ ... class xt -- object   } ) objects
@cindex @code{xt-new}
@kindex xt-new
@format
@code{xt-new} ( @i{... class xt -- object  }) objects ``xt-new''
@end format
Make a new object, using @code{xt ( align size -- addr )} to get memory.




@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node OOF, Mini-OOF, Objects, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection The @file{oof.fs} model
@cindex oof
@cindex object-oriented programming

@cindex @file{objects.fs}
@cindex @file{oof.fs}

This section describes the @file{oof.fs} package.

The package described in this section has been used in bigFORTH since 1991,
and used for two large applications: a chromatographic system used to create
new medicaments, and a graphic user interface library (MINOS).

You can find a description (in German) of @file{oof.fs} in @cite{Object
oriented bigFORTH} by Bernd Paysan, published in @cite{Vierte Dimension}
10(2), 1994.

@menu
* Properties of the OOF model::
* Basic OOF Usage::
* The OOF base class::
* Class Declaration::
* Class Implementation::     
@end menu

@node Properties of the OOF model, Basic OOF Usage, OOF, OOF
@subsubsection Properties of the @file{oof.fs} model
@cindex @file{oof.fs} properties

@itemize @bullet
@item
This model combines object oriented programming with information hiding. It
helps you writing large application, where scoping is necessary, because it
provides class-oriented scoping.

@item
Named objects, object pointers, and object arrays can be created, selector
invocation uses the ``object selector'' syntax. Selector invocation to
objects and/or selectors on the stack is a bit less convenient, but
possible.

@item
Selector invocation and instance variable usage of the active object is
straightforward, since both make use of the active object.

@item
Late binding is efficient and easy to use.

@item
State-smart objects parse selectors. However, extensibility is provided
using a (parsing) selector @code{postpone} and a selector @code{'}.

@item
An implementation in Standard Forth is available.

@end itemize


@node Basic OOF Usage, The OOF base class, Properties of the OOF model, OOF
@subsubsection Basic @file{oof.fs} Usage
@cindex @file{oof.fs} usage

This section uses the same example as for @code{objects} (@pxref{Basic
Objects Usage}).

You can define a class for graphical objects like this:

@cindex @code{class} usage
@cindex @code{class;} usage
@cindex @code{method} usage
@example
object class graphical \ "object" is the parent class
  method draw ( x y -- )
class;
@end example

This code defines a class @code{graphical} with an operation @code{draw}.
We can perform the operation @code{draw} on any @code{graphical} object,
e.g.:

@example
100 100 t-rex draw
@end example

@noindent
where @code{t-rex} is an object or object pointer, created with e.g.
@code{graphical : t-rex}.

@cindex abstract class
How do we create a graphical object? With the present definitions, we cannot
create a useful graphical object. The class @code{graphical} describes
graphical objects in general, but not any concrete graphical object type
(C++ users would call it an @emph{abstract class}); e.g., there is no method
for the selector @code{draw} in the class @code{graphical}.

For concrete graphical objects, we define child classes of the class
@code{graphical}, e.g.:

@example
graphical class circle \ "graphical" is the parent class
  cell var circle-radius
how:
  : draw ( x y -- )
    circle-radius @@ draw-circle ;

  : init ( n-radius -- )
    circle-radius ! ;
class;
@end example

Here we define a class @code{circle} as a child of @code{graphical}, with a
field @code{circle-radius}; it defines new methods for the selectors
@code{draw} and @code{init} (@code{init} is defined in @code{object}, the
parent class of @code{graphical}).

Now we can create a circle in the dictionary with:

@example
50 circle : my-circle
@end example

@noindent
@code{:} invokes @code{init}, thus initializing the field
@code{circle-radius} with 50. We can draw this new circle at (100,100)
with:

@example
100 100 my-circle draw
@end example

@cindex selector invocation, restrictions
@cindex class definition, restrictions
Note: You can only invoke a selector if the receiving object belongs to the
class where the selector was defined or one of its descendents; e.g., you
can invoke @code{draw} only for objects belonging to @code{graphical} or its
descendents (e.g., @code{circle}). The scoping mechanism will check if you
try to invoke a selector that is not defined in this class hierarchy, so
you'll get an error at compilation time.


@node The OOF base class, Class Declaration, Basic OOF Usage, OOF
@subsubsection The @file{oof.fs} base class
@cindex @file{oof.fs} base class

When you define a class, you have to specify a parent class.  So how do you
start defining classes? There is one class available from the start:
@code{object}. You have to use it as ancestor for all classes. It is the
only class that has no parent. Classes are also objects, except that they
don't have instance variables; class manipulation such as inheritance or
changing definitions of a class is handled through selectors of the class
@code{object}.

@code{object} provides a number of selectors:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{class} for subclassing, @code{definitions} to add definitions later
on, and @code{class?} to get type informations (is the class a subclass of
the class passed on the stack?).

@findex object-class ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-class}
@kindex object-class
@format
@code{object-class} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``object-class''
@end format

@findex object-definitions ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-definitions}
@kindex object-definitions
@format
@code{object-definitions} ( @i{--  }) oof ``object-definitions''
@end format

@findex object-class? ( @var{ o -- flag   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-class?}
@kindex object-class?
@format
@code{object-class?} ( @i{o -- flag  }) oof ``class-query''
@end format



@item
@code{init} and @code{dispose} as constructor and destructor of the
object. @code{init} is invocated after the object's memory is allocated,
while @code{dispose} also handles deallocation. Thus if you redefine
@code{dispose}, you have to call the parent's dispose with @code{super
dispose}, too.

@findex object-init ( @var{ ... --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-init}
@kindex object-init
@format
@code{object-init} ( @i{... --  }) oof ``object-init''
@end format

@findex object-dispose ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-dispose}
@kindex object-dispose
@format
@code{object-dispose} ( @i{--  }) oof ``object-dispose''
@end format



@item
@code{new}, @code{new[]}, @code{:}, @code{ptr}, @code{asptr}, and @code{[]}
to create named and unnamed objects and object arrays or object pointers.

@findex object-new ( @var{ -- o   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-new}
@kindex object-new
@format
@code{object-new} ( @i{-- o  }) oof ``object-new''
@end format

@findex object-new[] ( @var{ n -- o   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-new[]}
@kindex object-new[]
@format
@code{object-new[]} ( @i{n -- o  }) oof ``new-array''
@end format

@findex object-: ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-:}
@kindex object-:
@format
@code{object-:} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``define''
@end format

@findex object-ptr ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-ptr}
@kindex object-ptr
@format
@code{object-ptr} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``object-ptr''
@end format

@findex object-asptr ( @var{ o "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-asptr}
@kindex object-asptr
@format
@code{object-asptr} ( @i{o "name" --  }) oof ``object-asptr''
@end format

@findex object-[] ( @var{ n "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-[]}
@kindex object-[]
@format
@code{object-[]} ( @i{n "name" --  }) oof ``array''
@end format



@item
@code{::} and @code{super} for explicit scoping. You should use explicit
scoping only for super classes or classes with the same set of instance
variables. Explicitly-scoped selectors use early binding.

@findex object-:: ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-::}
@kindex object-::
@format
@code{object-::} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``scope''
@end format

@findex object-super ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-super}
@kindex object-super
@format
@code{object-super} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``object-super''
@end format



@item
@code{self} to get the address of the object

@findex object-self ( @var{ -- o   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-self}
@kindex object-self
@format
@code{object-self} ( @i{-- o  }) oof ``object-self''
@end format



@item
@code{bind}, @code{bound}, @code{link}, and @code{is} to assign object
pointers and instance defers.

@findex object-bind ( @var{ o "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-bind}
@kindex object-bind
@format
@code{object-bind} ( @i{o "name" --  }) oof ``object-bind''
@end format

@findex object-bound ( @var{ class addr "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-bound}
@kindex object-bound
@format
@code{object-bound} ( @i{class addr "name" --  }) oof ``object-bound''
@end format

@findex object-link ( @var{ "name" -- class addr   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-link}
@kindex object-link
@format
@code{object-link} ( @i{"name" -- class addr  }) oof ``object-link''
@end format

@findex object-is ( @var{ xt "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-is}
@kindex object-is
@format
@code{object-is} ( @i{xt "name" --  }) oof ``object-is''
@end format



@item
@code{'} to obtain selector tokens, @code{send} to invocate selectors form
the stack, and @code{postpone} to generate selector invocation code.

@findex object-' ( @var{ "name" -- xt   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-'}
@kindex object-'
@format
@code{object-'} ( @i{"name" -- xt  }) oof ``tick''
@end format

@findex object-postpone ( @var{ "name" --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-postpone}
@kindex object-postpone
@format
@code{object-postpone} ( @i{"name" --  }) oof ``object-postpone''
@end format



@item
@code{with} and @code{endwith} to select the active object from the stack,
and enable its scope. Using @code{with} and @code{endwith} also allows you
to create code using selector @code{postpone} without being trapped by the
state-smart objects.

@findex object-with ( @var{ o --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-with}
@kindex object-with
@format
@code{object-with} ( @i{o --  }) oof ``object-with''
@end format

@findex object-endwith ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{object-endwith}
@kindex object-endwith
@format
@code{object-endwith} ( @i{--  }) oof ``object-endwith''
@end format



@end itemize

@node Class Declaration, Class Implementation, The OOF base class, OOF
@subsubsection Class Declaration
@cindex class declaration

@itemize @bullet
@item
Instance variables

@findex var ( @var{ size --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{var}
@kindex var
@format
@code{var} ( @i{size --  }) oof ``var''
@end format
Create an instance variable




@item
Object pointers

@findex ptr ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{ptr}
@kindex ptr
@format
@code{ptr} ( @i{--  }) oof ``ptr''
@end format
Create an instance pointer


@findex asptr ( @var{ class --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{asptr}
@kindex asptr
@format
@code{asptr} ( @i{class --  }) oof ``asptr''
@end format
Create an alias to an instance pointer, cast to another class.




@item
Instance defers

@findex defer ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{defer}
@kindex defer
@format
@code{defer} ( @i{--  }) oof ``defer''
@end format
Create an instance defer




@item
Method selectors

@findex early ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{early}
@kindex early
@format
@code{early} ( @i{--  }) oof ``early''
@end format
Create a method selector for early binding.


@findex method ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{method}
@kindex method
@format
@code{method} ( @i{--  }) oof ``method''
@end format
Create a method selector.




@item
Class-wide variables

@findex static ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{static}
@kindex static
@format
@code{static} ( @i{--  }) oof ``static''
@end format
Create a class-wide cell-sized variable.




@item
End declaration

@findex how: ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{how:}
@kindex how:
@format
@code{how:} ( @i{--  }) oof ``how-to''
@end format
End declaration, start implementation


@findex class; ( @var{ --   } ) oof
@cindex @code{class;}
@kindex class;
@format
@code{class;} ( @i{--  }) oof ``end-class''
@end format
End class declaration or implementation




@end itemize

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Class Implementation, , Class Declaration, OOF
@subsubsection Class Implementation
@cindex class implementation

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Mini-OOF, Mini-OOF2, OOF, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection The @file{mini-oof.fs} model
@cindex mini-oof

Gforth's third object oriented Forth package is a 12-liner. It uses a
mixture of the @file{objects.fs} and the @file{oof.fs} syntax, and reduces
to the bare minimum of features. This is based on a posting of Bernd Paysan
in comp.lang.forth.

@menu
* Basic Mini-OOF Usage::
* Mini-OOF Example::
* Mini-OOF Implementation::  
@end menu

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Mini-OOF Usage, Mini-OOF Example, Mini-OOF, Mini-OOF
@subsubsection Basic @file{mini-oof.fs} Usage
@cindex mini-oof usage

@comment TODO better description of the last one
There is a base class (@code{class}, which allocates one cell for the object
pointer) plus seven other words: to define a method, a variable, a class; to
end a class, to resolve binding, to allocate an object and to compile a
class method.


@findex object ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{object}
@kindex object
@format
@code{object} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) mini-oof ``object''
@end format
@var{object} is the base class of all objects.


@findex method ( @var{ m v "name" -- m' v   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{method}
@kindex method
@format
@code{method} ( @i{m v "name" -- m' v  }) mini-oof ``method''
@end format
Define a selector.


@findex var ( @var{ m v size "name" -- m v'   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{var}
@kindex var
@format
@code{var} ( @i{m v size "name" -- m v'  }) mini-oof ``var''
@end format
Define a variable with @var{size} bytes.


@findex class ( @var{ class -- class selectors vars   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{class}
@kindex class
@format
@code{class} ( @i{class -- class selectors vars  }) mini-oof ``class''
@end format
Start the definition of a class.


@findex end-class ( @var{ class selectors vars "name" --   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{end-class}
@kindex end-class
@format
@code{end-class} ( @i{class selectors vars "name" --  }) mini-oof ``end-class''
@end format
End the definition of a class.


@findex defines ( @var{ xt class "name" --   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{defines}
@kindex defines
@format
@code{defines} ( @i{xt class "name" --  }) mini-oof ``defines''
@end format
Bind @var{xt} to the selector @var{name} in class @var{class}.


@findex new ( @var{ class -- o   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{new}
@kindex new
@format
@code{new} ( @i{class -- o  }) mini-oof ``new''
@end format
Create a new incarnation of the class @var{class}.


@findex :: ( @var{ class "name" --   } ) mini-oof
@cindex @code{::}
@format
@code{::} ( @i{class "name" --  }) mini-oof ``colon-colon''
@end format
Compile the method for the selector @var{name} of the class @var{class} (not
immediate!).





@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Mini-OOF Example, Mini-OOF Implementation, Basic Mini-OOF Usage, Mini-OOF
@subsubsection Mini-OOF Example
@cindex mini-oof example

@comment TODO could flesh this out with some comments from the Forthwrite article
A short example shows how to use this package. This example, in slightly
extended form, is supplied as @file{moof-exm.fs}

@example
object class
  method init
  method draw
end-class graphical
@end example

This code defines a class @code{graphical} with an operation @code{draw}.
We can perform the operation @code{draw} on any @code{graphical} object,
e.g.:

@example
100 100 t-rex draw
@end example

where @code{t-rex} is an object or object pointer, created with e.g.
@code{graphical new Constant t-rex}.

For concrete graphical objects, we define child classes of the class
@code{graphical}, e.g.:

@example
graphical class
  cell var circle-radius
end-class circle \ "graphical" is the parent class

:noname ( x y -- )
  circle-radius @@ draw-circle ; circle defines draw
:noname ( r -- )
  circle-radius ! ; circle defines init
@end example

There is no implicit init method, so we have to define one. The creation
code of the object now has to call init explicitely.

@example
circle new Constant my-circle
50 my-circle init
@end example

It is also possible to add a function to create named objects with automatic
call of @code{init}, given that all objects have @code{init} on the same
place:

@example
: new: ( .. o "name" -- )
    new dup Constant init ;
80 circle new: large-circle
@end example

We can draw this new circle at (100,100) with:

@example
100 100 my-circle draw
@end example

@node Mini-OOF Implementation, , Mini-OOF Example, Mini-OOF
@subsubsection @file{mini-oof.fs} Implementation

Object-oriented systems with late binding typically use a
``vtable''-approach: the first variable in each object is a pointer to a
table, which contains the methods as function pointers. The vtable may also
contain other information.

So first, let's declare selectors:

@example
: method ( m v "name" -- m' v ) Create  over , swap cell+ swap
  DOES> ( ... o -- ... ) @@ over @@ + @@ execute ;
@end example

During selector declaration, the number of selectors and instance variables
is on the stack (in address units). @code{method} creates one selector and
increments the selector number. To execute a selector, it takes the object,
fetches the vtable pointer, adds the offset, and executes the method @i{xt}
stored there. Each selector takes the object it is invoked with as top of
stack parameter; it passes the parameters (including the object) unchanged
to the appropriate method which should consume that object.

Now, we also have to declare instance variables

@example
: var ( m v size "name" -- m v' ) Create  over , +
  DOES> ( o -- addr ) @@ + ;
@end example

As before, a word is created with the current offset. Instance variables can
have different sizes (cells, floats, doubles, chars), so all we do is take
the size and add it to the offset. If your machine has alignment
restrictions, put the proper @code{aligned} or @code{faligned} before the
variable, to adjust the variable offset. That's why it is on the top of
stack.

We need a starting point (the base object) and some syntactic sugar:

@example
Create object  1 cells , 2 cells ,
: class ( class -- class selectors vars ) dup 2@@ ;
@end example

For inheritance, the vtable of the parent object has to be copied when a
new, derived class is declared. This gives all the methods of the parent
class, which can be overridden, though.

@example
: end-class  ( class selectors vars "name" -- )
  Create  here >r , dup , 2 cells ?DO ['] noop , 1 cells +LOOP
  cell+ dup cell+ r> rot @@ 2 cells /string move ;
@end example

The first line creates the vtable, initialized with @code{noop}s. The second
line is the inheritance mechanism, it copies the xts from the parent vtable.

We still have no way to define new methods, let's do that now:

@example
: defines ( xt class "name" -- ) ' >body @@ + ! ;
@end example

To allocate a new object, we need a word, too:

@example
: new ( class -- o )  here over @@ allot swap over ! ;
@end example

Sometimes derived classes want to access the method of the parent
object. There are two ways to achieve this with Mini-OOF: first, you could
use named words, and second, you could look up the vtable of the parent
object.

@example
: :: ( class "name" -- ) ' >body @@ + @@ compile, ;
@end example


Nothing can be more confusing than a good example, so here is one. First
let's declare a text object (called @code{button}), that stores text and
position:

@example
object class
  cell var text
  cell var len
  cell var x
  cell var y
  method init
  method draw
end-class button
@end example

@noindent
Now, implement the two methods, @code{draw} and @code{init}:

@example
:noname ( o -- )
 >r r@@ x @@ r@@ y @@ at-xy  r@@ text @@ r> len @@ type ;
 button defines draw
:noname ( addr u o -- )
 >r 0 r@@ x ! 0 r@@ y ! r@@ len ! r> text ! ;
 button defines init
@end example

@noindent
To demonstrate inheritance, we define a class @code{bold-button}, with no
new data and no new selectors:

@example
button class
end-class bold-button

: bold   27 emit ." [1m" ;
: normal 27 emit ." [0m" ;
@end example

@noindent
The class @code{bold-button} has a different draw method to @code{button},
but the new method is defined in terms of the draw method for @code{button}:

@example
:noname bold [ button :: draw ] normal ; bold-button defines draw
@end example

@noindent
Finally, create two objects and apply selectors:

@example
button new Constant foo
s" thin foo" foo init
page
foo draw
bold-button new Constant bar
s" fat bar" bar init
1 bar y !
bar draw
@end example

@node Mini-OOF2, Comparison with other object models, Mini-OOF, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection Mini-OOF2

Mini-OOF2 is very similar to Mini-OOF in many respects, but differs
significantly in a few aspects.  In particular, Mini-OOF2 has a current
object variable, and uses the primitives @code{>o} and @code{o>} to
manipulate that object stack.  All method invocations and instance variable
accesses refer to the current object.

@findex >o ( @var{ c-addr -- r:c-old  } ) new
@cindex @code{>o}
@kindex >o
@format
@code{>o} ( @i{c-addr -- r:c-old }) new ``to-o''
@end format
Set the current object to @var{c_addr}, the previous current object is
pushed to the return stack

@findex o> ( @var{ r:c-addr --  } ) new
@cindex @code{o>}
@kindex o>
@format
@code{o>} ( @i{r:c-addr -- }) new ``o-restore''
@end format
Restore the previous current object from the return stack


To ease passing an object pointer to method invocation or instance variable
accesses, the additional recognizer @code{rec-moof2} is activated.

@findex rec-moof2 ( @var{ addr u -- xt translate-moof2 | notfound   } ) mini-oof2
@cindex @code{rec-moof2}
@kindex rec-moof2
@format
@code{rec-moof2} ( @i{addr u -- xt translate-moof2 | notfound  }) mini-oof2 ``rec-moof2''
@end format
Very simplistic dot-parser, transforms @code{.}@var{selector/ivar} to
@code{>o} @var{selector/ivar} @code{o>}.



To assign methods to selectors, use @var{xt class} @code{is} @var{selector},
so no @code{defines} necessary.  For early binding of methods, @code{[}
@var{class} @code{] defers} @var{selector} is used, no need for @code{::}.

@node Comparison with other object models, , Mini-OOF2, Object-oriented Forth
@subsection Comparison with other object models
@cindex comparison of object models
@cindex object models, comparison

Many object-oriented Forth extensions have been proposed (@cite{A survey of
object-oriented Forths} (SIGPLAN Notices, April 1996) by Bradford
J. Rodriguez and W. F. S. Poehlman lists 17). This section discusses the
relation of the object models described here to two well-known and two
closely-related (by the use of method maps) models.  Andras Zsoter helped us
with this section.

@cindex Neon model
The most popular model currently seems to be the Neon model (see
@cite{Object-oriented programming in ANS Forth} (Forth Dimensions, March
1997) by Andrew McKewan) but this model has a number of limitations
@footnote{A longer version of this critique can be found in @cite{On
Standardizing Object-Oriented Forth Extensions} (Forth Dimensions, May 1997)
by Anton Ertl.}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
It uses a @code{@emph{selector object}} syntax, which makes it unnatural to
pass objects on the stack.

@item
It requires that the selector parses the input stream (at compile time);
this leads to reduced extensibility and to bugs that are hard to find.

@item
It allows using every selector on every object; this eliminates the need for
interfaces, but makes it harder to create efficient implementations.
@end itemize

@cindex Pountain's object-oriented model
Another well-known publication is @cite{Object-Oriented Forth} (Academic
Press, London, 1987) by Dick Pountain. However, it is not really about
object-oriented programming, because it hardly deals with late
binding. Instead, it focuses on features like information hiding and
overloading that are characteristic of modular languages like Ada (83).

@cindex Zsoter's object-oriented model
In @uref{http://www.forth.org/oopf.html, Does late binding have to be slow?}
(Forth Dimensions 18(1) 1996, pages 31-35) Andras Zsoter describes a model
that makes heavy use of an active object (like @code{this} in
@file{objects.fs}): The active object is not only used for accessing all
fields, but also specifies the receiving object of every selector
invocation; you have to change the active object explicitly with @code{@{
... @}}, whereas in @file{objects.fs} it changes more or less implicitly at
@code{m: ... ;m}. Such a change at the method entry point is unnecessary
with Zsoter's model, because the receiving object is the active object
already. On the other hand, the explicit change is absolutely necessary in
that model, because otherwise no one could ever change the active object. An
Standard Forth implementation of this model is available through
@uref{http://www.forth.org/oopf.html}.

@cindex @file{oof.fs}, differences to other models
The @file{oof.fs} model combines information hiding and overloading
resolution (by keeping names in various word lists) with object-oriented
programming. It sets the active object implicitly on method entry, but also
allows explicit changing (with @code{>o...o>} or with
@code{with...endwith}). It uses parsing and state-smart objects and classes
for resolving overloading and for early binding: the object or class parses
the selector and determines the method from this. If the selector is not
parsed by an object or class, it performs a call to the selector for the
active object (late binding), like Zsoter's model.  Fields are always
accessed through the active object. The big disadvantage of this model is
the parsing and the state-smartness, which reduces extensibility and
increases the opportunities for subtle bugs; essentially, you are only safe
if you never tick or @code{postpone} an object or class (Bernd disagrees,
but I (Anton) am not convinced).

@cindex @file{mini-oof.fs}, differences to other models
The @file{mini-oof.fs} model is quite similar to a very stripped-down
version of the @file{objects.fs} model, but syntactically it is a mixture of
the @file{objects.fs} and @file{oof.fs} models.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Regular Expressions, Programming Tools, Object-oriented Forth, Words
@section Regular Expressions
@cindex regexps

Regular expressions are pattern matching algorithms for strings found in
many contemporary languages.  You can add regular expression functionality
to Gforth with @code{require regexp.fs}.

The classical implementation for this pattern matching is a backtracking
algorithm, which is also necessary if you want to have features like
backreferencing.  Gforth implements regular expressions by providing a
language to define backtracking programs for pattern matching.  Basic
element is the control structure @code{FORK} @dots{} @code{JOIN}, which is a
forward call within a word, and therefore allows to code a lightweight try
and fail control structure.

@findex FORK ( @var{ compilation -- orig ; run-time f --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{FORK}
@kindex FORK
@format
@code{FORK} ( @i{compilation -- orig ; run-time f --  }) gforth-0.7 ``FORK''
@end format
AHEAD-like control structure: calls the code after JOIN.


@findex JOIN ( @var{ orig --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{JOIN}
@kindex JOIN
@format
@code{JOIN} ( @i{orig --  }) gforth-0.7 ``JOIN''
@end format
THEN-like control structure for FORK



You can program any sort of arbitrary checks yourself by computing a flag
and @code{?LEAVE} when the check fails.  Your regular expression code is
enclosed in @code{((} and @code{))}.

@findex (( ( @var{ addr u --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{((}
@kindex ((
@format
@code{((} ( @i{addr u --  }) regexp-pattern ``((''
@end format
start regexp block


@findex )) ( @var{ -- flag   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{))}
@kindex ))
@format
@code{))} ( @i{-- flag  }) regexp-pattern ``))''
@end format
end regexp block



Pattern matching in regular expressions have character sets as elements, so
a number of functions allow you to create and modify character sets (called
@code{charclass}).  All characters here are bytes, so this doesn't extend to
unicode characters.

@findex charclass ( @var{ --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{charclass}
@kindex charclass
@format
@code{charclass} ( @i{--  }) regexp-cg ``charclass''
@end format
Create a charclass


@findex +char ( @var{ char --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{+char}
@kindex +char
@format
@code{+char} ( @i{char --  }) regexp-cg ``+char''
@end format
add a char to the current charclass


@findex -char ( @var{ char --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{-char}
@kindex -char
@format
@code{-char} ( @i{char --  }) regexp-cg ``-char''
@end format
remove a char from the current charclass


@findex ..char ( @var{ start end --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{..char}
@kindex ..char
@format
@code{..char} ( @i{start end --  }) regexp-cg ``..char''
@end format
add a range of chars to the current charclass


@findex +chars ( @var{ addr u --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{+chars}
@kindex +chars
@format
@code{+chars} ( @i{addr u --  }) regexp-cg ``+chars''
@end format
add a string of chars to the current charclass


@findex +class ( @var{ class --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{+class}
@kindex +class
@format
@code{+class} ( @i{class --  }) regexp-cg ``+class''
@end format
union of charclass @var{class} and the current charclass


@findex -class ( @var{ class --   } ) regexp-cg
@cindex @code{-class}
@kindex -class
@format
@code{-class} ( @i{class --  }) regexp-cg ``-class''
@end format
subtract the charclass @var{class} from the current charclass



There are predefined charclasses and tests for them, and generic checks.  If
a check fails, the next possible alternative of the regular expression is
tried, or a loop is terminated.

@findex c? ( @var{ addr class --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{c?}
@kindex c?
@format
@code{c?} ( @i{addr class --  }) regexp-pattern ``c?''
@end format
check @var{addr} for membership in charclass @var{class}


@findex -c? ( @var{ addr class --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{-c?}
@kindex -c?
@format
@code{-c?} ( @i{addr class --  }) regexp-pattern ``-c?''
@end format
check @var{addr} for not membership in charclass @var{class}


@findex \d ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\d}
@kindex \d
@format
@code{\d} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``\d''
@end format
check for digit


@findex \s ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\s}
@kindex \s
@format
@code{\s} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``\s''
@end format
check for blanks


@findex .? ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{.?}
@kindex .?
@format
@code{.?} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``.?''
@end format
check for any single charachter


@findex -\d ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{-\d}
@kindex -\d
@format
@code{-\d} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``-\d''
@end format
check for not digit


@findex -\s ( @var{ addr -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{-\s}
@kindex -\s
@format
@code{-\s} ( @i{addr -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``-\s''
@end format
check for not blank


@findex ` ( @var{ "char" --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{`}
@kindex `
@format
@code{`} ( @i{"char" --  }) regexp-pattern ```''
@end format
check for particular char


@findex `? ( @var{ "char" --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{`?}
@kindex `?
@format
@code{`?} ( @i{"char" --  }) regexp-pattern ```?''
@end format

@findex -` ( @var{ "char" --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{-`}
@kindex -`
@format
@code{-`} ( @i{"char" --  }) regexp-pattern ``-`''
@end format
check for particular char



You can certainly also check for start and end of the string, and for whole
string constants.

@findex \^ ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\^}
@kindex \^
@format
@code{\^} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-pattern ``\^''
@end format
check for string start


@findex \$ ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\$}
@kindex \$
@format
@code{\$} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-pattern ``\$''
@end format
check for string end


@findex str=? ( @var{ addr1 addr u -- addr2   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{str=?}
@kindex str=?
@format
@code{str=?} ( @i{addr1 addr u -- addr2  }) regexp-pattern ``str=?''
@end format
check for a computed string on the stack (possibly a backreference)


doc-=''

Loops that check for repeated character sets can be greedy or non-greedy.

@findex @{** ( @var{ addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@{**}
@kindex @{**
@format
@code{@{**} ( @i{addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``begin-greedy-star''
@end format
greedy zero-or-more pattern


@findex **@} ( @var{ sys --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{**@}}
@kindex **@}
@format
@code{**@}} ( @i{sys --  }) regexp-pattern ``end-greedy-star''
@end format
end of greedy zero-or-more pattern


@findex @{++ ( @var{ addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@{++}
@kindex @{++
@format
@code{@{++} ( @i{addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``begin-greedy-plus''
@end format
greedy one-or-more pattern


@findex ++@} ( @var{ sys --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{++@}}
@kindex ++@}
@format
@code{++@}} ( @i{sys --  }) regexp-pattern ``end-greedy-plus''
@end format
end of greedy one-or-more pattern


@findex @{* ( @var{ addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@{*}
@kindex @{*
@format
@code{@{*} ( @i{addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``begin-non-greedy-star''
@end format
non-greedy zero-or-more pattern


@findex *@} ( @var{ addr addr' -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{*@}}
@kindex *@}
@format
@code{*@}} ( @i{addr addr' -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``end-non-greedy-star''
@end format
end of non-greedy zero-or-more pattern


@findex @{+ ( @var{ addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@{+}
@kindex @{+
@format
@code{@{+} ( @i{addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``begin-non-greedy-plus''
@end format
non-greedy one-or-more pattern


@findex +@} ( @var{ addr addr' -- addr'   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{+@}}
@kindex +@}
@format
@code{+@}} ( @i{addr addr' -- addr'  }) regexp-pattern ``end-non-greedy-plus''
@end format
end of non-greedy one-or-more pattern



Example: Searching for a substring really is a non-greedy match of anything
in front of it.

@findex // ( @var{ --   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{//}
@kindex //
@format
@code{//} ( @i{--  }) regexp-pattern ``//''
@end format
search for string



Alternatives are written with

@findex @{@{ ( @var{ addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@{@{}
@kindex @{@{
@format
@code{@{@{} ( @i{addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``begin-alternatives''
@end format
Start of alternatives


@findex || ( @var{ addr addr -- addr addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{||}
@kindex ||
@format
@code{||} ( @i{addr addr -- addr addr  }) regexp-pattern ``next-alternative''
@end format
separator between alternatives


@findex @}@} ( @var{ addr addr -- addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{@}@}}
@kindex @}@}
@format
@code{@}@}} ( @i{addr addr -- addr  }) regexp-pattern ``end-alternatives''
@end format
end of alternatives



You can use up to 9 variables named @code{\1} to @code{\9} to refer to
matched substrings

@findex \( ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\(}
@kindex \(
@format
@code{\(} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-pattern ``\(''
@end format
start of matching variable; variables are referred as \\1--9


@findex \) ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\)}
@kindex \)
@format
@code{\)} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-pattern ``\)''
@end format
end of matching variable


@findex \0 ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) regexp-pattern
@cindex @code{\0}
@kindex \0
@format
@code{\0} ( @i{-- addr u  }) regexp-pattern ``\0''
@end format
the whole string



Certainly, you can also write code to replace patterns you found.

@findex s>> ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{s>>}
@kindex s>>
@format
@code{s>>} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-replace ``s>>''
@end format
Start replace pattern region


@findex >> ( @var{ addr -- addr   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{>>}
@kindex >>
@format
@code{>>} ( @i{addr -- addr  }) regexp-replace ``>>''
@end format
Start arbitrary replacement code, the code shall compute a string on the
stack and pass it to @code{<<}


@findex << ( @var{ run-addr addr u -- run-addr   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{<<}
@kindex <<
@format
@code{<<} ( @i{run-addr addr u -- run-addr  }) regexp-replace ``<<''
@end format
Replace string from start of replace pattern region with @var{addr} @var{u}


@findex <<" ( @var{ "string<">" --   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{<<"}
@kindex <<"
@format
@code{<<"} ( @i{"string<">" --  }) regexp-replace ``<<"''
@end format
Replace string from start of replace pattern region with @var{string}


@findex s// ( @var{ addr u -- ptr   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{s//}
@kindex s//
@format
@code{s//} ( @i{addr u -- ptr  }) regexp-replace ``s//''
@end format
start search/replace loop


@findex //s ( @var{ ptr --   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{//s}
@kindex //s
@format
@code{//s} ( @i{ptr --  }) regexp-replace ``//s''
@end format
search end


@findex //o ( @var{ ptr addr u -- addr' u'   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{//o}
@kindex //o
@format
@code{//o} ( @i{ptr addr u -- addr' u'  }) regexp-replace ``//o''
@end format
end search/replace single loop


@findex //g ( @var{ ptr addr u -- addr' u'   } ) regexp-replace
@cindex @code{//g}
@kindex //g
@format
@code{//g} ( @i{ptr addr u -- addr' u'  }) regexp-replace ``//g''
@end format
end search/replace all loop



Examples can be found in @code{test/regexp-test.fs}.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Programming Tools, Multitasker, Regular Expressions, Words
@section Programming Tools
@cindex programming tools

@c !! move this and assembler down below OO stuff.

@menu
* Locating source code definitions::  and editing
* Locating uses of a word::  @code{where}.
* Locating exception source::  バックトレースの検証(examing)
* Examining compiled code::  @code{see} and friends.
* Examining data::           スタック と メモリ
* Forgetting words::         通常、再ロード前に使われます
* Debugging::                トレーサー @code{~~} 
                               を適宜挿入することによって
* Assertions::               あなたのプログラムを自己チェックさせます
* Singlestep Debugger::      あなたのプログラムをワート単位で実行します
* Code Coverage::            実行頻度を測定します
@end menu

@node Locating source code definitions, Locating uses of a word, Programming Tools, Programming Tools
@subsection Locating source code definitions
@cindex source code of a word
@cindex @code{view} (called @code{locate} in Gforth)
@cindex integrated development environment
@cindex IDE (integrated development environment)

Many programming systems are organized as an integrated development
environment (IDE) where the editor is the hub of the system, and allows
building and running programs.  If you want that, Gforth has it, too
(@pxref{Emacs and Gforth}).

However, several Forth systems have a different kind of IDE: The Forth
command line is the hub of the environment; you can view the source from
there in various ways, and call an editor if needed.

Gforth also implements such an IDE.  It mostly follows the conventions of
SwiftForth where they exist, but implements features beyond them.

An advantage of this approach is that it allows you to use your favourite
editor: set the environment variable @code{EDITOR} to your favourite editor,
and the editing commands will call that editor; Gforth invokes some GUI
editors in the background (so you do not need to finish editing to continue
with your Forth session), terminal editors in the foreground (default for
editors not known to Gforth is foreground).  If you have not set
@code{EDITOR}, the default editor is @file{vi}.

@findex locate ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{locate}
@kindex locate
@format
@code{locate} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``locate''
@end format
Show the source code of the word @i{name} and set the current location
there.


doc-xt-locate

The @emph{current location} is set by a number of other words in addition to
@code{locate}.  Also, when an error happens while loading a file, the
location of the error becomes the current location.

A number of words work with the current location:

@findex l ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{l}
@kindex l
@format
@code{l} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``l''
@end format
Display source code lines at the current location.


@findex n ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{n}
@kindex n
@format
@code{n} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``n''
@end format
Display lines behind the current location, or behind the last @code{n} or
@code{b} output (whichever was later).


@findex b ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{b}
@kindex b
@format
@code{b} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``b''
@end format
Display lines before the current location, or before the last @code{n} or
@code{b} output (whichever was later).


@findex g ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{g}
@kindex g
@format
@code{g} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``g''
@end format
Enter the editor at the current location, or at the start of the last
@code{n} or @code{b} output (whichever was later).



You can control how many lines @code{l}, @code{n} and @code{b} show by
changing the values:

@findex before-locate ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{before-locate}
@kindex before-locate
@format
@code{before-locate} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``before-locate''
@end format
number of lines shown before current location (default 3).


@findex after-locate ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{after-locate}
@kindex after-locate
@format
@code{after-locate} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``after-locate''
@end format
number of lines shown after current location (default 12).



Finally, you can directly go to the source code of a word in the editor with

@findex edit ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{edit}
@kindex edit
@format
@code{edit} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``edit''
@end format
Enter the editor at the location of "name"



You can see the definitions of similarly-named words with

@findex browse ( @var{ "subname" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{browse}
@kindex browse
@format
@code{browse} ( @i{"subname" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``browse''
@end format
Show all places where a word with a name that contains @i{subname} is
defined (@code{mwords}-like, @pxref{Word Lists}).  You can then use
@code{ww}, @code{nw} or @code{bw} (@pxref{Locating uses of a word}) to
inspect specific occurences more closely.




@node Locating uses of a word, Locating exception source, Locating source code definitions, Programming Tools
@subsection Locating uses of a word
@cindex Uses of a word

@findex where ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{where}
@kindex where
@format
@code{where} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``where''
@end format
Show all places where @i{name} is used (text-interpreted).  You can then use
@code{ww}, @code{nw} or @code{bw} to inspect specific occurences more
closely.  Gforth's @code{where} does not show the definition of @i{name};
use @code{locate} for that.


@findex ww ( @var{ u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ww}
@kindex ww
@format
@code{ww} ( @i{u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``ww''
@end format
The next @code{l} or @code{g} shows the @code{where} result with index @i{u}


@findex nw ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{nw}
@kindex nw
@format
@code{nw} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``nw''
@end format
The next @code{l} or @code{g} shows the next @code{where} result; if the
current one is the last one, after @code{nw} there is no current one.  If
there is no current one, after @code{nw} the first one is the current one.


@findex bw ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{bw}
@kindex bw
@format
@code{bw} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``bw''
@end format
The next @code{l} or @code{g} shows the previous @code{where} result; if the
current one is the first one, after @code{bw} there is no current one.  If
there is no current one, after @code{bw} the last one is the current one.


@findex gg ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{gg}
@kindex gg
@format
@code{gg} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``gg''
@end format
The next @code{ww}, @code{nw}, @code{bw}, @code{bb}, @code{nb}, @code{lb}
(but not @code{locate}, @code{edit}, @code{l} or @code{g}) puts it result in
the editor (like @code{g}).  Use @code{gg gg} to make this permanent rather
than one-shot.


@findex ll ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ll}
@kindex ll
@format
@code{ll} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``ll''
@end format
The next @code{ww}, @code{nw}, @code{bw}, @code{bb}, @code{nb}, @code{lb}
(but not @code{locate}, @code{edit}, @code{l} or @code{g}) displays in the
Forth system (like @code{l}).  Use @code{ll ll} to make this permanent
rather than one-shot.


@findex whereg ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{whereg}
@kindex whereg
@format
@code{whereg} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``whereg''
@end format
Like @code{where}, but puts the output in the editor.  In Emacs, you can
then use the compilation-mode commands (@pxref{Compilation Mode,,,emacs,GNU
Emacs Manual}) to inspect specific occurences more closely.


@findex short-where ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{short-where}
@kindex short-where
@format
@code{short-where} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``short-where''
@end format
Set up @code{where} to use a short file format (default).


@findex expand-where ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{expand-where}
@kindex expand-where
@format
@code{expand-where} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``expand-where''
@end format
Set up @code{where} to use a fully expanded file format (to pass to
e.g. editors).


@findex prepend-where ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{prepend-where}
@kindex prepend-where
@format
@code{prepend-where} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``prepend-where''
@end format
Set up @code{where} to show the file on a separate line, followed by
@code{where} lines without file names (like SwiftForth).



The data we have on word usage also allows us to show which words have no
uses:

@findex unused-words ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{unused-words}
@kindex unused-words
@format
@code{unused-words} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``unused-words''
@end format
list all words without usage



@node Locating exception source, Examining compiled code, Locating uses of a word, Programming Tools
@subsection Locating exception source
@cindex exception source code
@cindex source code for exception
@cindex backtrace examination

@findex tt ( @var{ u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{tt}
@kindex tt
@format
@code{tt} ( @i{u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``tt''
@end format

@findex nt ( @var{  --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{nt}
@kindex nt
@format
@code{nt} ( @i{ --  }) gforth-1.0 ``nt''
@end format

@findex bt ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{bt}
@kindex bt
@format
@code{bt} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``bt''
@end format


@node Examining compiled code, Examining data, Locating exception source, Programming Tools
@subsection Examining compiled code
@cindex compiled code examination

And finally, @code{see} and friends show compiled code.  Some of the things
in the source code are not present in the compiled code (e.g., formatting
and comments), but this is useful to see what threaded code or native code
is produced by macros and Gforth's optimization features.

@findex see ( @var{ "<spaces>name" --   } ) tools
@cindex @code{see}
@kindex see
@format
@code{see} ( @i{"<spaces>name" --  }) tools ``see''
@end format
Locate @var{name} using the current search order. Display the definition of
@var{name}. Since this is achieved by decompiling the definition, the
formatting is mechanised and some source information (comments, interpreted
sequences within definitions etc.) is lost.


@findex xt-see ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{xt-see}
@kindex xt-see
@format
@code{xt-see} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-0.2 ``xt-see''
@end format
Decompile the definition represented by @i{xt}.


@findex simple-see ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{simple-see}
@kindex simple-see
@format
@code{simple-see} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.6 ``simple-see''
@end format
Decompile the colon definition @i{name}, showing a line for each cell, and
try to guess a meaning for the cell, and show that.


@findex xt-simple-see ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xt-simple-see}
@kindex xt-simple-see
@format
@code{xt-simple-see} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``xt-simple-see''
@end format
Decompile the colon definition @i{xt} like @code{simple-see}


@findex simple-see-range ( @var{ addr1 addr2 --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{simple-see-range}
@kindex simple-see-range
@format
@code{simple-see-range} ( @i{addr1 addr2 --  }) gforth-0.6 ``simple-see-range''
@end format
Decompile code in [@i{addr1},@i{addr2}) like @code{simple-see}


@findex see-code ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{see-code}
@kindex see-code
@format
@code{see-code} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.7 ``see-code''
@end format
Like @code{simple-see}, but also shows the dynamic native code for the
inlined primitives.  For static superinstructions, it shows the primitive
sequence instead of the first primitive (the other primitives of the
superinstruction are shown, too).  For primitives for which native code is
generated, it shows the number of stack items in registers at the beginning
and at the end (e.g., @code{1->1} means 1 stack item is in a register at the
start and at the end).  For each primitive or superinstruction with native
code, the inline arguments and component primitives are shown first, then
the native code.


@findex xt-see-code ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{xt-see-code}
@kindex xt-see-code
@format
@code{xt-see-code} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``xt-see-code''
@end format
Decompile the colon definition @i{xt} like @code{see-code}.


@findex see-code-range ( @var{ addr1 addr2 --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{see-code-range}
@kindex see-code-range
@format
@code{see-code-range} ( @i{addr1 addr2 --  }) gforth-0.7 ``see-code-range''
@end format
Decompile code in [@i{addr1},@i{addr2}) like @code{see-code}.



As an example, consider:

@example
: foo x f@@ fsin drop over ;
@end example

This is not particularly useful, but it demonstrates the various code
generation differences.  Compiling this on @code{gforth-fast} on AMD64 and
then using @code{see-code foo} outputs:

@example
$7FD0CEE8C510 lit f@@     1->1 
$7FD0CEE8C518 x
$7FD0CEE8C520 f@@
7FD0CEB51697:   movsd   [r12],xmm15
7FD0CEB5169D:   mov     rax,$00[r13]
7FD0CEB516A1:   sub     r12,$08
7FD0CEB516A5:   add     r13,$18
7FD0CEB516A9:   movsd   xmm15,[rax]
7FD0CEB516AE:   mov     rcx,-$08[r13]
7FD0CEB516B2:   jmp     ecx
$7FD0CEE8C528 fsin
$7FD0CEE8C530 drop    1->0 
7FD0CEB516B4:   add     r13,$08
$7FD0CEE8C538 over    0->1 
7FD0CEB516B8:   mov     r8,$10[r15]
7FD0CEB516BC:   add     r13,$08
$7FD0CEE8C540 ;s    1->1 
7FD0CEB516C0:   mov     r10,[rbx]
7FD0CEB516C3:   add     rbx,$08
7FD0CEB516C7:   lea     r13,$08[r10]
7FD0CEB516CB:   mov     rcx,-$08[r13]
7FD0CEB516CF:   jmp     ecx
@end example

First, you see a threaded-code cell for a static superinstruction with the
components @code{lit} and @code{f@@}, starting and ending with one data
stack item in a register (@code{1->1}); this is followed by the cell for the
argument @code{x} of @code{lit}, and the cell for the @code{f@@} component
of the superinstruction; the latter cell is not used, but is there for
Gforth-internal reasons.

Next, the dynamically generated native code for the superinstruction
@code{lit f@@} is shown; note that this native code is not mixed with the
threaded code in memory, as you can see by comparing the addresses.

If you want to understand the native code shown here: the threaded-code
instruction pointer is in @code{r13}, the data stack pointer in @code{r15};
the first data stack register is @code{r8} (i.e., the top of stack resides
there if there is one data stack item in a register); the return stack
pointer is in @code{rbx}, the FP stack pointer in @code{r12}, and the top of
the floating-pont stack in @code{xmm15}.  Note that the register assignments
vary between engines, so you may see a different register assignment for
this code.

The dynamic native code for @code{lit f@@} ends with a dispatch jump (aka
NEXT), because the code for the next word @code{fsin} in the definition is
not dynamically generated.

Next, you see the threaded-code cell for @code{fsin}.  There is no
dynamically-generated native code for this word, and @code{see-code} does
not show the static native code for it (you can look at it with @code{see
fsin}).  Like all words with static native code in @code{gforth-fast}, the
effect on the data stack representation is @code{1->1} (for @code{gforth},
@code{0->0}), but this is not shown.

Next, you see the threaded-code cell for @code{drop}; the native-code
variant used here starts with one data stack item in registers, and ends
with zero data stack items in registers (@code{1->0}).  This is followed by
the native code for this variant of @code{drop}.  There is no NEXT here,
because the native code falls through to the code for the next word.

Next, you see the threaded-code cell for @code{over} followed by the
dynamically-generated native code in the @code{0->1} variant.

Finally, you see the threaded and native code for @code{;s} (the primitive
compiled for @code{;} in @code{foo}).  @code{;s} performs control flow (it
returns), so it has to end with a NEXT.

@node Examining data, Forgetting words, Examining compiled code, Programming Tools
@subsection Examining data and code
@cindex examining data and code

The following words inspect the stack non-destructively:

@findex ... ( @var{ x1 .. xn -- x1 .. xn   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{...}
@kindex ...
@format
@code{...} ( @i{x1 .. xn -- x1 .. xn  }) gforth-1.0 ``...''
@end format
smart version of @code{.s}


@findex .s ( @var{ --   } ) tools
@cindex @code{.s}
@kindex .s
@format
@code{.s} ( @i{--  }) tools ``dot-s''
@end format
Display the number of items on the data stack, followed by a list of the
items (but not more than specified by @code{maxdepth-.s}; TOS is the
right-most item.


@findex f.s ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{f.s}
@kindex f.s
@format
@code{f.s} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``f-dot-s''
@end format
Display the number of items on the floating-point stack, followed by a list
of the items (but not more than specified by @code{maxdepth-.s}; TOS is the
right-most item.


@findex f.s-precision ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{f.s-precision}
@kindex f.s-precision
@format
@code{f.s-precision} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-1.0 ``f.s-precision''
@end format
A @code{value}.  @i{U} is the field width for f.s output. Other precision
details are derived from that value.


@findex maxdepth-.s ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{maxdepth-.s}
@kindex maxdepth-.s
@format
@code{maxdepth-.s} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``maxdepth-dot-s''
@end format
A variable containing 9 by default.  @code{.s} and @code{f.s} display at
most that many stack items.



There is a word @code{.r} but it does @i{not} display the return stack! It
is used for formatted numeric output (@pxref{Simple numeric output}).

The following words work on the stack as a whole, either by determining the
depth or by clearing them:

@findex depth ( @var{ -- +n   } ) core
@cindex @code{depth}
@kindex depth
@format
@code{depth} ( @i{-- +n  }) core ``depth''
@end format
@var{+n} is the number of values that were on the data stack before @var{+n}
itself was placed on the stack.


@findex fdepth ( @var{ -- +n   } ) floating
@cindex @code{fdepth}
@kindex fdepth
@format
@code{fdepth} ( @i{-- +n  }) floating ``f-depth''
@end format
@i{+n} is the current number of (floating-point) values on the
floating-point stack.


@findex clearstack ( @var{ ... --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{clearstack}
@kindex clearstack
@format
@code{clearstack} ( @i{... --  }) gforth-0.2 ``clear-stack''
@end format
remove and discard all/any items from the data stack.


@findex fclearstack ( @var{ r0 .. rn --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{fclearstack}
@kindex fclearstack
@format
@code{fclearstack} ( @i{r0 .. rn --  }) gforth-1.0 ``f-clearstack''
@end format
clear the floating point stack


@findex clearstacks ( @var{ ... --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{clearstacks}
@kindex clearstacks
@format
@code{clearstacks} ( @i{... --  }) gforth-0.7 ``clear-stacks''
@end format
empty data and FP stack



The following words inspect memory.

@findex ? ( @var{ a-addr --   } ) tools
@cindex @code{?}
@kindex ?
@format
@code{?} ( @i{a-addr --  }) tools ``question''
@end format
Display the contents of address @var{a-addr} in the current number base.


@findex dump ( @var{ addr u --   } ) tools
@cindex @code{dump}
@kindex dump
@format
@code{dump} ( @i{addr u --  }) tools ``dump''
@end format
Display @var{u} lines of memory starting at address @var{addr}. Each line
displays the contents of 16 bytes. When Gforth is running under an operating
system you may get @file{Invalid memory address} errors if you attempt to
access arbitrary locations.



@node Forgetting words, Debugging, Examining data, Programming Tools
@subsection Forgetting words
@cindex words, forgetting
@cindex forgeting words

@c  anton: other, maybe better places for this subsection: Defining Words;
@c  Dictionary allocation.  At least a reference should be there.

Forth allows you to forget words (and everything that was alloted in the
dictonary after them) in a LIFO manner.

@findex marker ( @var{ "<spaces> name" --   } ) core-ext
@cindex @code{marker}
@kindex marker
@format
@code{marker} ( @i{"<spaces> name" --  }) core-ext ``marker''
@end format
Create a definition, @i{name} (called a @i{mark}) whose execution semantics
are to remove itself and everything defined after it.



The most common use of this feature is during progam development: when you
change a source file, forget all the words it defined and load it again
(since you also forget everything defined after the source file was loaded,
you have to reload that, too).  Note that effects like storing to variables
and destroyed system words are not undone when you forget words.  With a
system like Gforth, that is fast enough at starting up and compiling, I find
it more convenient to exit and restart Gforth, as this gives me a clean
slate.

Here's an example of using @code{marker} at the start of a source file that
you are debugging; it ensures that you only ever have one copy of the file's
definitions compiled at any time:

@example
[IFDEF] my-code
    my-code
[ENDIF]

marker my-code
init-included-files

\ .. definitions start here
\ .
\ .
\ end
@end example


@node Debugging, Assertions, Forgetting words, Programming Tools
@subsection Debugging
@cindex debugging

Languages with a slow edit/compile/link/test development loop tend to
require sophisticated tracing/stepping debuggers to facilate debugging.

A much better (faster) way in fast-compiling languages is to add printing
code at well-selected places, let the program run, look at the output, see
where things went wrong, add more printing code, etc., until the bug is
found.

The simple debugging aids provided in @file{debugs.fs} are meant to support
this style of debugging.

The word @code{~~} prints debugging information (by default the source
location and the stack contents). It is easy to insert. If you use Emacs it
is also easy to remove (@kbd{C-x ~} in the Emacs Forth mode to query-replace
them with nothing). The deferred words @code{printdebugdata} and
@code{.debugline} control the output of @code{~~}. The default source
location output format works well with Emacs' compilation mode, so you can
step through the program at the source level using @kbd{C-x `} (the
advantage over a stepping debugger is that you can step in any direction and
you know where the crash has happened or where the strange data has
occurred).

@findex ~~ ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{~~}
@kindex ~~
@format
@code{~~} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``tilde-tilde''
@end format
Prints the source code location of the @code{~~} and the stack contents with
@code{.debugline}.


@findex printdebugdata ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{printdebugdata}
@kindex printdebugdata
@format
@code{printdebugdata} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``print-debug-data''
@end format

@findex .debugline ( @var{ nfile nline --   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{.debugline}
@kindex .debugline
@format
@code{.debugline} ( @i{nfile nline --  }) gforth-0.6 ``print-debug-line''
@end format
Print the source code location indicated by @var{nfile nline}, and
additional debugging information; the default @code{.debugline} prints the
additional information with @code{printdebugdata}.


@findex debug-fid ( @var{ -- file-id   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{debug-fid}
@kindex debug-fid
@format
@code{debug-fid} ( @i{-- file-id  }) gforth-1.0 ``@i{File-id}''
@end format
debugging words for output.  By default it is the process's @code{stderr}.



@cindex filenames in @code{~~} output
@code{~~} (and assertions) will usually print the wrong file name if a
marker is executed in the same file after their occurance.  They will print
@samp{*somewhere*} as file name if a marker is executed in the same file
before their occurance.

@findex once ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{once}
@kindex once
@format
@code{once} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``once''
@end format
do the following up to THEN only once


@findex ~~bt ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{~~bt}
@kindex ~~bt
@format
@code{~~bt} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``~~bt''
@end format
print stackdump and backtrace


@findex ~~1bt ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{~~1bt}
@kindex ~~1bt
@format
@code{~~1bt} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``~~1bt''
@end format
print stackdump and backtrace once


@findex ??? ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{???}
@kindex ???
@format
@code{???} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``???''
@end format
Open a debuging shell


@findex WTF?? ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{WTF??}
@kindex WTF??
@format
@code{WTF??} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``WTF??''
@end format
Open a debugging shell with backtrace and stack dump


@findex !!FIXME!! ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{!!FIXME!!}
@kindex !!FIXME!!
@format
@code{!!FIXME!!} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``!!FIXME!!''
@end format
word that should never be reached


@findex replace-word ( @var{ xt1 xt2 --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{replace-word}
@kindex replace-word
@format
@code{replace-word} ( @i{xt1 xt2 --  }) gforth-1.0 ``replace-word''
@end format
make xt2 do xt1, both need to be colon definitions


@findex ~~Variable ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{~~Variable}
@kindex ~~Variable
@format
@code{~~Variable} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``~~Variable''
@end format
Variable that will be watched on every access


@findex ~~Value ( @var{ n "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{~~Value}
@kindex ~~Value
@format
@code{~~Value} ( @i{n "name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``~~Value''
@end format
Value that will be watched on every access


@findex +ltrace ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{+ltrace}
@kindex +ltrace
@format
@code{+ltrace} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``+ltrace''
@end format
turn on line tracing


@findex -ltrace ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{-ltrace}
@kindex -ltrace
@format
@code{-ltrace} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``-ltrace''
@end format
turn off line tracing


@findex #loc ( @var{ nline nchar "file" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{#loc}
@kindex #loc
@format
@code{#loc} ( @i{nline nchar "file" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``#loc''
@end format
set next word's location to @var{nline nchar} in @var{"file"}



@node Assertions, Singlestep Debugger, Debugging, Programming Tools
@subsection Assertions
@cindex assertions

It is a good idea to make your programs self-checking, especially if you
make an assumption that may become invalid during maintenance (for example,
that a certain field of a data structure is never zero). Gforth supports
@dfn{assertions} for this purpose. They are used like this:

@example
assert( @i{flag} )
@end example

The code between @code{assert(} and @code{)} should compute a flag, that
should be true if everything is alright and false otherwise. It should not
change anything else on the stack. The overall stack effect of the assertion
is @code{( -- )}. E.g.

@example
assert( 1 1 + 2 = ) \ what we learn in school
assert( dup 0<> ) \ assert that the top of stack is not zero
assert( false ) \ this code should not be reached
@end example

The need for assertions is different at different times. During debugging,
we want more checking, in production we sometimes care more for
speed. Therefore, assertions can be turned off, i.e., the assertion becomes
a comment. Depending on the importance of an assertion and the time it takes
to check it, you may want to turn off some assertions and keep others turned
on. Gforth provides several levels of assertions for this purpose:


@findex assert0( ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert0(}
@kindex assert0(
@format
@code{assert0(} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert-zero''
@end format
Important assertions that should always be turned on.


@findex assert1( ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert1(}
@kindex assert1(
@format
@code{assert1(} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert-one''
@end format
Normal assertions; turned on by default.


@findex assert2( ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert2(}
@kindex assert2(
@format
@code{assert2(} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert-two''
@end format
Debugging assertions.


@findex assert3( ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert3(}
@kindex assert3(
@format
@code{assert3(} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert-three''
@end format
Slow assertions that you may not want to turn on in normal debugging; you
would turn them on mainly for thorough checking.


@findex assert( ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert(}
@kindex assert(
@format
@code{assert(} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert(''
@end format
Equivalent to @code{assert1(}


@findex ) ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{)}
@kindex )
@format
@code{)} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``close-paren''
@end format
End an assertion. Generic end, can be used for other similar purposes




The variable @code{assert-level} specifies the highest assertions that are
turned on. I.e., at the default @code{assert-level} of one, @code{assert0(}
and @code{assert1(} assertions perform checking, while @code{assert2(} and
@code{assert3(} assertions are treated as comments.

The value of @code{assert-level} is evaluated at compile-time, not at
run-time. Therefore you cannot turn assertions on or off at run-time; you
have to set the @code{assert-level} appropriately before compiling a piece
of code. You can compile different pieces of code at different
@code{assert-level}s (e.g., a trusted library at level 1 and newly-written
code at level 3).


@findex assert-level ( @var{ -- a-addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{assert-level}
@kindex assert-level
@format
@code{assert-level} ( @i{-- a-addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``assert-level''
@end format
All assertions above this level are turned off.




If an assertion fails, a message compatible with Emacs' compilation mode is
produced and the execution is aborted (currently with @code{ABORT"}.  If
there is interest, we will introduce a special throw code. But if you intend
to @code{catch} a specific condition, using @code{throw} is probably more
appropriate than an assertion).

@cindex filenames in assertion output
Assertions (and @code{~~}) will usually print the wrong file name if a
marker is executed in the same file after their occurance.  They will print
@samp{*somewhere*} as file name if a marker is executed in the same file
before their occurance.

Definitions in Standard Forth for these assertion words are provided in
@file{compat/assert.fs}.


@node Singlestep Debugger, Code Coverage, Assertions, Programming Tools
@subsection Singlestep Debugger
@cindex singlestep Debugger
@cindex debugging Singlestep

The singlestep debugger works only with the engine @code{gforth-itc}.

When you create a new word there's often the need to check whether it
behaves correctly or not. You can do this by typing @code{dbg badword}. A
debug session might look like this:

@example
: badword 0 DO i . LOOP ;  ok
2 dbg badword 
: badword  
Scanning code...

Nesting debugger ready!

400D4738  8049BC4 0              -> [ 2 ] 00002 00000 
400D4740  8049F68 DO             -> [ 0 ] 
400D4744  804A0C8 i              -> [ 1 ] 00000 
400D4748 400C5E60 .              -> 0 [ 0 ] 
400D474C  8049D0C LOOP           -> [ 0 ] 
400D4744  804A0C8 i              -> [ 1 ] 00001 
400D4748 400C5E60 .              -> 1 [ 0 ] 
400D474C  8049D0C LOOP           -> [ 0 ] 
400D4758  804B384 ;              ->  ok
@end example

Each line displayed is one step. You always have to hit return to execute
the next word that is displayed. If you don't want to execute the next word
in a whole, you have to type @kbd{n} for @code{nest}. Here is an overview
what keys are available:

@table @i

@item @key{RET}
Next; Execute the next word.

@item n
Nest; Single step through next word.

@item u
Unnest; Stop debugging and execute rest of word. If we got to this word with
nest, continue debugging with the calling word.

@item d
Done; Stop debugging and execute rest.

@item s
Stop; Abort immediately.

@end table

Debugging large application with this mechanism is very difficult, because
you have to nest very deeply into the program before the interesting part
begins. This takes a lot of time. 

To do it more directly put a @code{BREAK:} command into your source code.
When program execution reaches @code{BREAK:} the single step debugger is
invoked and you have all the features described above.

If you have more than one part to debug it is useful to know where the
program has stopped at the moment. You can do this by the @code{BREAK"
string"} command. This behaves like @code{BREAK:} except that string is
typed out when the ``breakpoint'' is reached.


@findex dbg ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dbg}
@kindex dbg
@format
@code{dbg} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``dbg''
@end format

@findex break: ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{break:}
@kindex break:
@format
@code{break:} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.4 ``break:''
@end format

@findex break" ( @var{ 'ccc"' --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{break"}
@kindex break"
@format
@code{break"} ( @i{'ccc"' --  }) gforth-0.4 ``break"''
@end format


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Code Coverage, , Singlestep Debugger, Programming Tools
@subsection Code Coverage and Execution Frequency
@cindex code coverage
@cindex execution frequency

If you run extensive tests on your code, you often want to figure out if the
tests exercise all parts of the code.  This is called (test)  coverage.  The
file @file{coverage.fs} contains tools for measuring the coverage as well as
execution frequency.

Code coverage inserts counting code in every basic block (straight-line code
sequence) loaded after @file{coverage.fs}.  Each time that code is run, it
increments the counter for that basic block.  Later you can show the source
file with the counts inserted in these basic blocks.

@findex nocov[ ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{nocov[}
@kindex nocov[
@format
@code{nocov[} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``nocov-bracket''
@end format
(Immediate) Turn coverage off temporarily.


@findex ]nocov ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{]nocov}
@kindex ]nocov
@format
@code{]nocov} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``bracket-nocov''
@end format
(Immediate) End of temporary turned off coverage.


@findex coverage? ( @var{ -- f   } ) gforth-internal
@cindex @code{coverage?}
@kindex coverage?
@format
@code{coverage?} ( @i{-- f  }) gforth-internal ``coverage?''
@end format
Value: Coverage check on/off


@findex cov+ ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{cov+}
@kindex cov+
@format
@code{cov+} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``cov+''
@end format
(Immediate) Place a coverage counter here.


@findex ?cov+ ( @var{ flag -- flag   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{?cov+}
@kindex ?cov+
@format
@code{?cov+} ( @i{flag -- flag  }) gforth-experimental ``?cov+''
@end format
(Immediate) A coverage counter for a flag; in the coverage output you see
three numbers behind @code{?cov}: The first is the number of executions
where the top-of-stack was non-zero; the second is the number of executions
where it was zero; the third is the total number of executions.


@findex .coverage ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{.coverage}
@kindex .coverage
@format
@code{.coverage} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``.coverage''
@end format
Show code with execution frequencies.


@findex annotate-cov ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{annotate-cov}
@kindex annotate-cov
@format
@code{annotate-cov} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``annotate-cov''
@end format
For every file with coverage information, produce a @code{.cov} file that
has the execution frequencies inserted.  We recommend to use @code{bw-cover}
first (with the default @code{color-cover} you get escape sequences in the
files).


@findex cov% ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{cov%}
@kindex cov%
@format
@code{cov%} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``cov-percent''
@end format
Print the percentage of basic blocks loaded after @file{coverage.fs} that
are executed at least once.


@findex .cover-raw ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{.cover-raw}
@kindex .cover-raw
@format
@code{.cover-raw} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``.cover-raw''
@end format
Print raw execution counts.


@c commented out because the included-file index is not a
@c   user-friendly way to pass a file (yet).
@c doc-.cover-file
@c doc-covered?

By default, the counts are shown in colour (using ANSI escape sequences),
but you can use @code{bw-cover} to show them in parenthesized form without
escape sequences.

@findex bw-cover ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{bw-cover}
@kindex bw-cover
@format
@code{bw-cover} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``bw-cover''
@end format
Print execution counts in parentheses (source-code compatible).


@findex color-cover ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{color-cover}
@kindex color-cover
@format
@code{color-cover} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``color-cover''
@end format
Print execution counts in colours (default).



You can save and reload the coverage counters in binary format, to aggregate
coverage counters across several test runs.

@findex save-cov ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{save-cov}
@kindex save-cov
@format
@code{save-cov} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``save-cov''
@end format
Save coverage counters.


@findex load-cov ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{load-cov}
@kindex load-cov
@format
@code{load-cov} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``load-cov''
@end format
Load coverage counters.



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Multitasker, C Interface, Programming Tools, Words
@section Multitasker
@cindex multitasker

@menu
* Pthreads::                 ネイティブ Unix 用マルチタスカー
* Cilk::                     Cilk風の spawn+sync 実装
@end menu

Gforth offers two multitaskers: a traditional, cooperative round-robin
multitasker, and a pthread-based multitasker which allows to run several
threads concurrently on multi-core machines.  The pthread-based is now
marked as experimental feature, as standardization of Forth multitaskers
will likely change the names of words without changing their semantics.

@node Pthreads, Cilk, Multitasker, Multitasker
@subsection Pthreads
@cindex pthread

@c You need to include @file{unix/pthread.fs} to use the following words.

Posix threads can run in parallel on several cores, or with pre-emptive
multitasking on onecore.  However, many of the following words are the same
as in the traditional cooperative multi-tasker.

In addition, there are words that allow you to make sure that only one task
at a time changes something, and for communicating between tasks.  These
words are necessary for pre-emptive and multi-core multi-tasking, because
the cooperative-multitasking way of performing transactions between calls to
@code{pause} does not work in this environment.

@menu
* Basic multi-tasking::
* Task-local data::
* Semaphores::
* Hardware operations for multi-tasking::
* Message queues::           
@end menu

@node Basic multi-tasking, Task-local data, Pthreads, Pthreads
@subsubsection Basic multi-tasking

Tasks can be created with @code{newtask} or @code{newtask4} with a given
amount of stack space (either all the same or each stack's size specified).

@findex newtask ( @var{ stacksize -- task   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{newtask}
@kindex newtask
@format
@code{newtask} ( @i{stacksize -- task  }) gforth-experimental ``newtask''
@end format
creates @i{task}; each stack (data, return, FP, locals) has size
@i{stacksize}.


@findex task ( @var{ ustacksize "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{task}
@kindex task
@format
@code{task} ( @i{ustacksize "name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``task''
@end format
creates a task @i{name}; each stack (data, return, FP, locals)  has size
@i{ustacksize}.@* @i{name} execution: ( -- @i{task} )


@findex newtask4 ( @var{ u-data u-return u-fp u-locals -- task   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{newtask4}
@kindex newtask4
@format
@code{newtask4} ( @i{u-data u-return u-fp u-locals -- task  }) gforth-experimental ``newtask4''
@end format
creates @i{task} with data stack size @i{u-data}, return stack size
@i{u-return}, FP stack size @i{u-fp} and locals stack size @i{u-locals}.



If you don't know which stack sizes to use for the task, you can use the
size(s) of the main task:

@findex stacksize ( @var{ -- u   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{stacksize}
@kindex stacksize
@format
@code{stacksize} ( @i{-- u  }) gforth-experimental ``stacksize''
@end format
@i{u} is the data stack size of the main task.


@findex stacksize4 ( @var{ -- u-data u-return u-fp u-locals   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{stacksize4}
@kindex stacksize4
@format
@code{stacksize4} ( @i{-- u-data u-return u-fp u-locals  }) gforth-experimental ``stacksize4''
@end format
Pushes the data, return, FP, and locals stack sizes of the main task.



A task is created in an inactive state.  To let it run, you have to activate
it with one of the following words:

@findex initiate ( @var{ xt task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{initiate}
@kindex initiate
@format
@code{initiate} ( @i{xt task --  }) gforth-experimental ``initiate''
@end format
Let @i{task} execute @i{xt}.  Upon return from the @i{xt}, the task
terminates itself (VFX compatible).  Use one-time executable closures to
pass arbitrary paramenters to a task.



The following legacy words provide the same functionality as
@code{initiate}, but with a different interface: Like @code{does>}, they
split their containing colon definition in two parts: The part before
@code{activate}/@code{pass} runs in the activating task, and returns to its
caller after activating the task.  The part behind
@code{activate}/@code{pass} is executed in the activated target task.

@findex activate ( @var{ run-time nest-sys1 task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{activate}
@kindex activate
@format
@code{activate} ( @i{run-time nest-sys1 task --  }) gforth-experimental ``activate''
@end format
Let @i{task} perform the code behind @code{activate}, and return to the
caller of the word containing @code{activate}.  When the task returns from
the code behind @code{activate}, it terminates itself.


@findex pass ( @var{ x1 .. xn n task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{pass}
@kindex pass
@format
@code{pass} ( @i{x1 .. xn n task --  }) gforth-experimental ``pass''
@end format
Pull @i{x1 .. xn n} from the current task's data stack and push @i{x1 .. xn}
on @i{task}'s data stack.  Let @i{task} perform the code behind @code{pass},
and return to the caller of the word containing @code{pass}.  When the task
returns from the code behind @code{pass}, it terminates itself.



You can also do creation and activation in one step:

@findex execute-task ( @var{ xt -- task   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{execute-task}
@kindex execute-task
@format
@code{execute-task} ( @i{xt -- task  }) gforth-experimental ``execute-task''
@end format
Create a new task @var{task} with the same stack sizes as the main task. Let
@i{task} execute @i{xt}.  Upon return from the @i{xt}, the task terminates
itself.



Apart from terminating by running to the end, a task can terminate itself
with @code{kill-task}.  Other tasks can terminate it with @code{kill}.

@findex kill-task ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{kill-task}
@kindex kill-task
@format
@code{kill-task} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``kill-task''
@end format
Terminate the current task.


@findex kill ( @var{ task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{kill}
@kindex kill
@format
@code{kill} ( @i{task --  }) gforth-experimental ``kill''
@end format
Terminate @i{task}.



Tasks can also temporarily stop themselves or be stopped:

@findex halt ( @var{ task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{halt}
@kindex halt
@format
@code{halt} ( @i{task --  }) gforth-experimental ``halt''
@end format
Stop a task


@findex stop ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{stop}
@kindex stop
@format
@code{stop} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``stop''
@end format
stops the current task, and waits for events (which may restart it)


@findex stop-ns ( @var{ timeout --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{stop-ns}
@kindex stop-ns
@format
@code{stop-ns} ( @i{timeout --  }) gforth-experimental ``stop-ns''
@end format
Stop with timeout (in nanoseconds), better replacement for ms



A task restarts when the timeout is over or when another task wakes it with:

@findex restart ( @var{ task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{restart}
@kindex restart
@format
@code{restart} ( @i{task --  }) gforth-experimental ``restart''
@end format
Wake a task



There is also:

@findex pause ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{pause}
@kindex pause
@format
@code{pause} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``pause''
@end format
voluntarily switch to the next waiting task (@code{pause} is the traditional
cooperative task switcher; in the pthread multitasker, you don't need
@code{pause} for cooperation, but you still can use it e.g. when you have to
resort to polling for some reason).  This also checks for events in the
queue.



@node Task-local data, Semaphores, Basic multi-tasking, Pthreads
@subsubsection Task-local data
@cindex user variables
@cindex user space
@cindex task-local data

In Forth every task has essentially the same task-local data, called
``user'' area (early Forth systems were multi-user systems and there often
was one user per task).  The @i{task} result of, e.g. @code{newtask} is the
start address of its user area.  Each task gets the user data defined by the
system (e.g., @code{base}).  You can define additional user data with:

@findex User ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{User}
@kindex User
@format
@code{User} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``User''
@end format
@i{Name} is a user variable (1 cell).@* @i{Name} execution: ( -- @i{addr}
)@* @i{Addr} is the address of the user variable in the current task.


@findex AUser ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{AUser}
@kindex AUser
@format
@code{AUser} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``AUser''
@end format
@i{Name} is a user variable containing an address (this only makes a
difference in the cross-compiler).


@findex uallot ( @var{ n1 -- n2   } ) gforth-0.3
@cindex @code{uallot}
@kindex uallot
@format
@code{uallot} ( @i{n1 -- n2  }) gforth-0.3 ``uallot''
@end format
Reserve @i{n1} bytes of user data.  @i{n2} is the offset of the start of the
reserved area within the user area.


@findex UValue ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{UValue}
@kindex UValue
@format
@code{UValue} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``UValue''
@end format
@i{Name} is a user value.@* @i{Name} execution: ( -- @i{x} )


@findex UDefer ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{UDefer}
@kindex UDefer
@format
@code{UDefer} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``UDefer''
@end format
@i{Name} is a task-local deferred word.@* @i{Name} execution: ( ... -- ... )



There are also the following words for dealing with user data.

@findex up@@ ( @var{ -- a-addr  } ) new
@cindex @code{up@@}
@kindex up@@
@format
@code{up@@} ( @i{-- a-addr }) new ``up-fetch''
@end format
@i{Addr} is the start of the user area of the current task (@i{addr} also
serves as the @i{task} identifier of the current task).

@findex user' ( @var{ "name" -- u   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{user'}
@kindex user'
@format
@code{user'} ( @i{"name" -- u  }) gforth-experimental ``user'''
@end format
@i{U} is the offset of the user variable @i{name} in the user area of each
task.


@findex 's ( @var{ addr1 task -- addr2   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{'s}
@kindex 's
@format
@code{'s} ( @i{addr1 task -- addr2  }) gforth-experimental ``'s''
@end format
With @i{addr1} being an address in the user data of the current task,
@i{addr2} is the corresponding address in @i{task}'s user data.



@c doc-udp

@node Semaphores, Hardware operations for multi-tasking, Task-local data, Pthreads
@subsubsection Semaphores

A cooperative multitasker can ensure that there is no other task interacting
between two invocations of @code{pause}.  Pthreads however are really
concurrent tasks (at least on a multi-core CPU), and therefore, several
techniques to avoid conflicts when accessing the same resources.

Semaphores can only be aquired by one thread, all other threads have to wait
until the semapohre is released.

@findex semaphore ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{semaphore}
@kindex semaphore
@format
@code{semaphore} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-experimental ``semaphore''
@end format
create a named semaphore @i{name}@* @i{name} execution: ( -- @i{semaphore} )


@findex lock ( @var{ semaphore --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{lock}
@kindex lock
@format
@code{lock} ( @i{semaphore --  }) gforth-experimental ``lock''
@end format
lock the semaphore


@findex unlock ( @var{ semaphore --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{unlock}
@kindex unlock
@format
@code{unlock} ( @i{semaphore --  }) gforth-experimental ``unlock''
@end format
unlock the semaphore



The other approach to prevent concurrent access is the critical section.
Here, we implement a critical section with a semaphore, so you have to
specify the semaphore which is used for the critical section.  Only those
critical sections which use the same semaphore are mutually exclusive.

@findex critical-section ( @var{ xt semaphore --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{critical-section}
@kindex critical-section
@format
@code{critical-section} ( @i{xt semaphore --  }) gforth-experimental ``critical-section''
@end format
Execute @i{xt} while locking @i{semaphore}.  After leaving @i{xt},
@i{semaphore} is unlocked even if an exception is thrown.



@node Hardware operations for multi-tasking, Message queues, Semaphores, Pthreads
@subsubsection Hardware operations for multi-tasking

Atomic hardware operations perform the whole operation, without any other
task seeing an intermediate state.  These operations can be used to
synchronize tasks without using slow OS primitives, but compared to the
non-atomic sequences of operations they tend to be slow.  Atomic operations
only work correctly on aligned addresses, even on hardware that otherwise
does not require alignment.

@findex !@@ ( @var{ u1 a-addr -- u2  } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{!@@}
@kindex !@@
@format
@code{!@@} ( @i{u1 a-addr -- u2 }) gforth-experimental ``store-fetch''
@end format
load @var{u2} from @var{a_addr}, and store @var{u1} there, as atomic
operation

@findex +!@@ ( @var{ u1 a-addr -- u2  } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{+!@@}
@kindex +!@@
@format
@code{+!@@} ( @i{u1 a-addr -- u2 }) gforth-experimental ``add-store-fetch''
@end format
load @var{u2} from @var{a_addr}, and increment this location by @var{u1}, as
atomic operation

@findex ?!@@ ( @var{ unew uold a-addr -- uprev  } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{?!@@}
@kindex ?!@@
@format
@code{?!@@} ( @i{unew uold a-addr -- uprev }) gforth-experimental ``question-store-fetch''
@end format
load @var{uprev} from @var{a_addr}, compare it to @var{uold}, and if equal,
store @var{unew} there, as atomic operation


Another hardware operation is the memory barrier.  Unfortunately modern
hardware often can reorder memory operations relative to other memory
operations (as seen by a different core), and the memory barrier suppresses
this reordering for one point in the execution of the task.

@findex barrier ( @var{ --  } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{barrier}
@kindex barrier
@format
@code{barrier} ( @i{-- }) gforth-experimental ``barrier''
@end format
All memory operations before the barrier are performed before any memory
operation after the barrier.


@node Message queues, , Hardware operations for multi-tasking, Pthreads
@subsubsection Message queues

Gforth's message queues are a variant of the actor model.

An event is an xt; the sending task tells the receiving task to run an
event, and the receiving task performs one event from its message queue when
it is ready.  Execute-once closures can be used for events that pass
parameters.

@findex send-event ( @var{ xt task --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{send-event}
@kindex send-event
@format
@code{send-event} ( @i{xt task --  }) gforth-experimental ``send-event''
@end format
Task IPC: send @var{xt} to @var{task}.  The xt is executed there.  Use a
one-shot closure to pass parameters with the xt.



When several tasks send event to one task, the events may arrive in any
order.  In order to receive events, you put one of the following words in
the receiving task:

@findex ?events ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{?events}
@kindex ?events
@format
@code{?events} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``question-events''
@end format
Perform all event sequences in the current task's message queue, one event
sequence at a time.


@findex event-loop ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{event-loop}
@kindex event-loop
@format
@code{event-loop} ( @i{--  }) gforth-experimental ``event-loop''
@end format
Wait for event sequences, and execute any event sequences when they arrive.
Return to waiting if no event sequences are in the queue.  This word never
returns.



Alternatively, when a task is @code{stop}ped, it is also ready for receiving
event, and receiving an event will wake it up.

@c @node Conditions,  , Message queues, Pthreads
@c @subsubsection Conditions
@c 
@c The pthreads library also provides conditional variables, which allow to
@c wait for a condition.  Using the message queue is generally preferred.
@c 
@c doc-cond
@c doc-pthread_cond_signal
@c doc-pthread_cond_broadcast
@c doc-pthread_cond_wait
@c doc-pthread_cond_timedwait

@node Cilk, , Pthreads, Multitasker
@subsection Cilk

Gforth's Cilk is a framework for dividing work between multiple tasks
running on several cores, inspired by the programming language of the same
name.  Use @code{require cilk.fs} if you want to use Cilk.

The idea is that you identify subproblems that can be solved in parallel,
and the framework assigns worker tasks to these subproblems.  In particular,
you use one of the @code{spawn} words for each subtask.  Eventually you need
to wait with @code{cilk-sync} for the subproblems to be solved.

Currently all the spawning has to happen from one task, and @code{cilk-sync}
waits for all subproblems to complete, so using the current Gforth Cilk for
recursive algorithms is not straightforward.

Do not divide the subproblems too finely, in order to avoid overhead; how
fine is too fine depends on how uniform the run-time for the subproblems is,
but for problems with substantial run-time, having 5*@code{cores}
subproblems is probably a good starting point.

@findex cores ( @var{ -- u   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{cores}
@kindex cores
@format
@code{cores} ( @i{-- u  }) cilk ``cores''
@end format
A value containing the number of worker tasks to use.  By default this is
the number of hardware threads (with SMT/HT), if we can determine that,
otherwise 1.  If you want to use a different number, change @code{cores}
before calling @code{cilk-init}.


@findex cilk-init ( @var{ --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{cilk-init}
@kindex cilk-init
@format
@code{cilk-init} ( @i{--  }) cilk ``cilk-init''
@end format
Start the worker tasks if not already done.


@findex spawn ( @var{ xt --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{spawn}
@kindex spawn
@format
@code{spawn} ( @i{xt --  }) cilk ``spawn''
@end format
Execute @i{xt} ( -- ) in a worker task.  Use one-time executable closures to
pass heap-allocated closures, allowing to pass arbitrary data from the
spawner to the code running in the worker.@* E.g.: @code{( n r ) [@{: n f: r
:@}h1 code ;] spawn}


@findex spawn1 ( @var{ x xt --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{spawn1}
@kindex spawn1
@format
@code{spawn1} ( @i{x xt --  }) cilk ``spawn1''
@end format
Execute @i{xt} ( x -- ) in a worker task.


@findex spawn2 ( @var{ x1 x2 xt --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{spawn2}
@kindex spawn2
@format
@code{spawn2} ( @i{x1 x2 xt --  }) cilk ``spawn2''
@end format
Execute @i{xt} ( x1 x2 -- ) in a worker task.


@findex cilk-sync ( @var{ --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{cilk-sync}
@kindex cilk-sync
@format
@code{cilk-sync} ( @i{--  }) cilk ``cilk-sync''
@end format
Wait for all subproblems to complete.


@findex cilk-bye ( @var{ --   } ) cilk
@cindex @code{cilk-bye}
@kindex cilk-bye
@format
@code{cilk-bye} ( @i{--  }) cilk ``cilk-bye''
@end format
Terminate all workers.



@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@node C Interface, Assembler and Code Words, Multitasker, Words
@section C Interface
@cindex C interface
@cindex foreign language interface
@cindex interface to C functions

Gforth's C interface works by compiling a wrapper library that contains C
functions which take parameters from the Forth stacks and calls the C
functions.  This wrapper library is compiled by the C compiler.  Compilation
results are cached, so that Gforth only needs to rerun the C compilation if
the wrapper library has to change.  This build process is automatic, and
done at the end of a interface declaration.  Gforth uses libtool and GCC for
that process.

The C interface is now mostly complete, callbacks have been added, but for
structs, we use Forth2012 structs, which don't have independent scopes.  The
offsets of those structs are extracted from header files with a SWIG plugin.

@menu
* Calling C Functions::
* Declaring C Functions::
* Calling C function pointers::
* Defining library interfaces::
* Declaring OS-level libraries::
* Callbacks::
* C interface internals::
* Low-Level C Interface Words::
* Automated interface generation using SWIG::
* Migrating the C interface from earlier Gforth::  
@end menu

@node Calling C Functions, Declaring C Functions, C Interface, C Interface
@subsection Calling C functions
@cindex C functions, calls to
@cindex calling C functions

Once a C function is declared (see @pxref{Declaring C Functions}), you can
call it as follows: You push the arguments on the stack(s), and then call
the word for the C function.  The arguments have to be pushed in the same
order as the arguments appear in the C documentation (i.e., the first
argument is deepest on the stack).  Integer and pointer arguments have to be
pushed on the data stack, floating-point arguments on the FP stack; these
arguments are consumed by the called C function.

On returning from the C function, the return value, if any, resides on the
appropriate stack: an integer return value is pushed on the data stack, an
FP return value on the FP stack, and a void return value results in not
pushing anything.  Note that most C functions have a return value, even if
that is often not used in C; in Forth, you have to @code{drop} this return
value explicitly if you do not use it.

The C interface automatically converts between the C type and the Forth type
as necessary, on a best-effort basis (in some cases, there may be some
loss).

As an example, consider the POSIX function @code{lseek()}:

@example
off_t lseek(int fd, off_t offset, int whence);
@end example

This function takes three integer arguments, and returns an integer
argument, so a Forth call for setting the current file offset to the start
of the file could look like this:

@example
fd @@ 0 SEEK_SET lseek -1 = if
  ... \ error handling
then
@end example

You might be worried that an @code{off_t} does not fit into a cell, so you
could not pass larger offsets to lseek, and might get only a part of the
return values.  In that case, in your declaration of the function
(@pxref{Declaring C Functions}) you should declare it to use double-cells
for the off_t argument and return value, and maybe give the resulting Forth
word a different name, like @code{dlseek}; the result could be called like
this:

@example
fd @@ 0. SEEK_SET dlseek -1. d= if
  ... \ error handling
then
@end example

Passing and returning structs or unions is currently not supported by our
interface@footnote{If you know the calling convention of your C compiler,
you usually can call such functions in some way, but that way is usually not
portable between platforms, and sometimes not even between C compilers.}.

Calling functions with a variable number of arguments (@emph{variadic}
functions, e.g., @code{printf()}) is only supported by having you declare
one function-calling word for each argument pattern, and calling the
appropriate word for the desired pattern.



@node Declaring C Functions, Calling C function pointers, Calling C Functions, C Interface
@subsection Declaring C Functions
@cindex C functions, declarations
@cindex declaring C functions

Before you can call @code{lseek} or @code{dlseek}, you have to declare it.
The declaration consists of two parts: 

@table @b

@item The C part
is the C declaration of the function, or more typically and portably, a
C-style @code{#include} of a file that contains the declaration of the C
function.

@item The Forth part
declares the Forth types of the parameters and the Forth word name
corresponding to the C function.

@end table

For the words @code{lseek} and @code{dlseek} mentioned earlier, the
declarations are:

@example
\c #define _FILE_OFFSET_BITS 64
\c #include <sys/types.h>
\c #include <unistd.h>
c-function lseek lseek n n n -- n
c-function dlseek lseek n d n -- d
@end example

The C part of the declarations is prefixed by @code{\c}, and the rest of the
line is ordinary C code.  You can use as many lines of C declarations as you
like, and they are visible for all further function declarations.

The Forth part declares each interface word with @code{c-function}, followed
by the Forth name of the word, the C name of the called function, and the
stack effect of the word.  The stack effect contains an arbitrary number of
types of parameters, then @code{--}, and then exactly one type for the
return value.  The possible types are:

@table @code

@item n
single-cell integer

@item a
address (single-cell)

@item d
double-cell integer

@item r
floating-point value

@item func
C function pointer

@item void
no value (used as return type for void functions)

@end table

@cindex variadic C functions

To deal with variadic C functions, you can declare one Forth word for every
pattern you want to use, e.g.:

@example
\c #include <stdio.h>
c-function printf-nr printf a n r -- n
c-function printf-rn printf a r n -- n
@end example

Note that with C functions declared as variadic (or if you don't provide a
prototype), the C interface has no C type to convert to, so no automatic
conversion happens, which may lead to portability problems in some cases.
You can add the C type cast in curly braces after the Forth type.  This also
allows to pass e.g. structs to C functions, which in Forth cannot live on
the stack.

@example
c-function printfll printf a n@{(long long)@} -- n
c-function pass-struct pass_struct a@{*(struct foo *)@} -- n
@end example

This typecasting is not available to return values, as C does not allow
typecasts for lvalues.

@findex \c ( @var{ "rest-of-line" --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{\c}
@kindex \c
@format
@code{\c} ( @i{"rest-of-line" --  }) gforth-0.7 ``backslash-c''
@end format
One line of C declarations for the C interface


@findex c-function ( @var{ "forth-name" "c-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{c-function}
@kindex c-function
@format
@code{c-function} ( @i{"forth-name" "c-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --  }) gforth-0.7 ``c-function''
@end format
Define a Forth word @i{forth-name}.  @i{Forth-name} has the specified stack
effect and calls the C function @code{c-name}.


@findex c-value ( @var{ "forth-name" "c-name" "---" "type" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c-value}
@kindex c-value
@format
@code{c-value} ( @i{"forth-name" "c-name" "---" "type" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-value''
@end format
Define a Forth word @i{forth-name}.  @i{Forth-name} has the specified stack
effect and gives the C value of @code{c-name}.


@findex c-variable ( @var{ "forth-name" "c-name" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c-variable}
@kindex c-variable
@format
@code{c-variable} ( @i{"forth-name" "c-name" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-variable''
@end format
Define a Forth word @i{forth-name}.  @i{Forth-name} returns the address of
@code{c-name}.



In order to work, this C interface invokes GCC at run-time and uses dynamic
linking.  If these features are not available, there are other, less
convenient and less portable C interfaces in @file{lib.fs} and
@file{oldlib.fs}.  These interfaces are mostly undocumented and mostly
incompatible with each other and with the documented C interface; you can
find some examples for the @file{lib.fs} interface in @file{lib.fs}.


@node Calling C function pointers, Defining library interfaces, Declaring C Functions, C Interface
@subsection Calling C function pointers from Forth
@cindex C function pointers, calling from Forth

If you come across a C function pointer (e.g., in some C-constructed
structure) and want to call it from your Forth program, you could use the
structures as described above by defining a macro.  Or you use
@code{c-funptr}.

@findex c-funptr ( @var{ "forth-name" <@{>"c-typecast"<@}> "@{type@}" "---" "type" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c-funptr}
@kindex c-funptr
@format
@code{c-funptr} ( @i{"forth-name" <@{>"c-typecast"<@}> "@{type@}" "---" "type" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-funptr''
@end format
Define a Forth word @i{forth-name}.  @i{Forth-name} has the specified stack
effect plus the called pointer on top of stack, i.e. @code{( @{type@} ptr --
type )} and calls the C function pointer @code{ptr} using the typecast or
struct access @code{c-typecast}.



Let us assume that there is a C function pointer type @code{func1} defined
in some header file @file{func1.h}, and you know that these functions take
one integer argument and return an integer result; and you want to call
functions through such pointers.  Just define

@example
\c #include <func1.h>
c-funptr call-func1 @{((func1)ptr)@} n -- n
@end example

and then you can call a function pointed to by, say @code{func1a} as
follows:

@example
-5 func1a call-func1 .
@end example

The Forth word @code{call-func1} is similar to @code{execute}, except that
it takes a C @code{func1} pointer instead of a Forth execution token, and it
is specific to @code{func1} pointers.  For each type of function pointer you
want to call from Forth, you have to define a separate calling word.

@node Defining library interfaces, Declaring OS-level libraries, Calling C function pointers, C Interface
@subsection Defining library interfaces
@cindex giving a name to a library interface
@cindex library interface names

You can give a name to a bunch of C function declarations (a library
interface), as follows:

@example
c-library lseek-lib
\c #define _FILE_OFFSET_BITS 64
...
end-c-library
@end example

The effect of giving such a name to the interface is that the names of the
generated files will contain that name, and when you use the interface a
second time, it will use the existing files instead of generating and
compiling them again, saving you time.  The generated file contains a 128
bit hash (not cryptographically safe, but good enough for that purpose) of
the source code, so changing the declarations will cause a new compilation.
Normally these files are cached in
@file{$HOME/.gforth/}@var{architecture}@file{/libcc-named}, so if you
experience problems or have other reasons to force a recompilation, you can
delete the files there.

Note that you should use @code{c-library} before everything else having
anything to do with that library, as it resets some setup stuff.  The idea
is that the typical use is to put each
@code{c-library}...@code{end-c-library} unit in its own file, and to be able
to include these files in any order.  All other words dealing with the C
interface are hidden in the vocabulary @code{c-lib}, which is put on top o
the search stack by @code{c-library} and removed by @code{end-c-library}.

Note that the library name is not allocated in the dictionary and therefore
does not shadow dictionary names.  It is used in the file system, so you
have to use naming conventions appropriate for file systems.  The name is
also used as part of the C symbols, but characters outside the legal C
symbol names are replaced with underscores.  Also, you shall not call a
function you declare after @code{c-library} before you perform
@code{end-c-library}.

A major benefit of these named library interfaces is that, once they are
generated, the tools used to generated them (in particular, the C compiler
and libtool) are no longer needed, so the interface can be used even on
machines that do not have the tools installed.  The build system of Gforth
can even cross-compile these libraries, so that the libraries are available
for plattforms on which build tools aren't installed.

@findex c-library-name ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{c-library-name}
@kindex c-library-name
@format
@code{c-library-name} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.7 ``c-library-name''
@end format
Start a C library interface with name @i{c-addr u}.


@findex c-library ( @var{ "name" --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{c-library}
@kindex c-library
@format
@code{c-library} ( @i{"name" --  }) gforth-0.7 ``c-library''
@end format
Parsing version of @code{c-library-name}


@findex end-c-library ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{end-c-library}
@kindex end-c-library
@format
@code{end-c-library} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``end-c-library''
@end format
Finish and (if necessary) build the latest C library interface.




@node Declaring OS-level libraries, Callbacks, Defining library interfaces, C Interface
@subsection Declaring OS-level libraries
@cindex Shared libraries in C interface
@cindex Dynamically linked libraries in C interface
@cindex Libraries in C interface

For calling some C functions, you need to link with a specific OS-level
library that contains that function.  E.g., the @code{sin} function requires
linking a special library by using the command line switch @code{-lm}.  In
our C iterface you do the equivalent thing by calling @code{add-lib} as
follows:

@example
clear-libs
s" m" add-lib
\c #include <math.h>
c-function sin sin r -- r
@end example

First, you clear any libraries that may have been declared earlier (you
don't need them for @code{sin}); then you add the @code{m} library (actually
@code{libm.so} or somesuch) to the currently declared libraries; you can add
as many as you need.  Finally you declare the function as shown above.
Typically you will use the same set of library declarations for many
function declarations; you need to write only one set for that, right at the
beginning.

Note that you must not call @code{clear-libs} inside
@code{c-library...end-c-library}; however, @code{c-library} performs the
function of @code{clear-libs}, so @code{clear-libs} is not necessary, and
you usually want to put @code{add-lib} calls inside
@code{c-library...end-c-library}.

@findex clear-libs ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{clear-libs}
@kindex clear-libs
@format
@code{clear-libs} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.7 ``clear-libs''
@end format
Clear the list of libs


@findex add-lib ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{add-lib}
@kindex add-lib
@format
@code{add-lib} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.7 ``add-lib''
@end format
Add library lib@i{string} to the list of libraries, where @i{string} is
represented by @i{c-addr u}.


@findex add-libpath ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{add-libpath}
@kindex add-libpath
@format
@code{add-libpath} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.7 ``add-libpath''
@end format
Add path @i{string} to the list of library search pathes, where @i{string}
is represented by @i{c-addr u}.


@findex add-framework ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{add-framework}
@kindex add-framework
@format
@code{add-framework} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``add-framework''
@end format
Add framework lib@i{string} to the list of frameworks, where @i{string} is
represented by @i{c-addr u}.


@findex add-incdir ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{add-incdir}
@kindex add-incdir
@format
@code{add-incdir} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``add-incdir''
@end format
Add path @i{c-addr u} to the list of include search pathes


@findex add-cflags ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{add-cflags}
@kindex add-cflags
@format
@code{add-cflags} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``add-cflags''
@end format
add any kind of cflags to compilation


@findex add-ldflags ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{add-ldflags}
@kindex add-ldflags
@format
@code{add-ldflags} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-1.0 ``add-ldflags''
@end format
add flag to linker



@node Callbacks, C interface internals, Declaring OS-level libraries, C Interface
@subsection Callbacks
@cindex Callback functions written in Forth
@cindex C function pointers to Forth words

In some cases you have to pass a function pointer to a C function, i.e., the
library wants to call back to your application (and the pointed-to function
is called a callback function).  You can pass the address of an existing C
function (that you get with @code{lib-sym}, @pxref{Low-Level C Interface
Words}), but if there is no appropriate C function, you probably want to
define the function as a Forth word.  Then you need to generate a callback
as described below:

You can generate C callbacks from Forth code with @code{c-callback}.

@findex c-callback ( @var{ "forth-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c-callback}
@kindex c-callback
@format
@code{c-callback} ( @i{"forth-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-callback''
@end format
Define a callback instantiator with the given signature.  The callback
instantiator @i{forth-name} @code{( xt -- addr )} takes an @var{xt}, and
returns the @var{addr}ess of the C function handling that callback.


@findex c-callback-thread ( @var{ "forth-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{c-callback-thread}
@kindex c-callback-thread
@format
@code{c-callback-thread} ( @i{"forth-name" "@{type@}" "---" "type" --  }) gforth-1.0 ``c-callback-thread''
@end format
Define a callback instantiator with the given signature.  The callback
instantiator @i{forth-name} @code{( xt -- addr )} takes an @var{xt}, and
returns the @var{addr}ess of the C function handling that callback.  This
callback is safe when called from another thread



This precompiles a number of callback functions (up to the value
@code{callback#}).  The prototype of the C function is deduced from its
Forth signature.  If this is not sufficient, you can add types in curly
braces after the Forth type.

@example
c-callback vector4double: f f f f -- void
c-callback vector4single: f@{float@} f@{float@} f@{float@} f@{float@} -- void
@end example

@c I don't understand the existing callback interface from the example - anton


@c > > Und dann gibt's noch die fptr-Deklaration, die einem
@c > > C-Funktionspointer entspricht (Deklaration gleich wie bei
@c > > Library-Funktionen, nur ohne den C-Namen, Aufruf mit der
@c > > C-Funktionsadresse auf dem TOS).
@c >
@c > Ja, da bin ich dann ausgestiegen, weil ich aus dem Beispiel nicht
@c > gesehen habe, wozu das gut ist.
@c 
@c Irgendwie muss ich den Callback ja testen. Und es soll ja auch 
@c vorkommen, dass man von irgendwelchen kranken Interfaces einen 
@c Funktionspointer übergeben bekommt, den man dann bei Gelegenheit 
@c aufrufen muss. Also kann man den deklarieren, und das damit deklarierte 
@c Wort verhält sich dann wie ein EXECUTE für alle C-Funktionen mit 
@c demselben Prototyp.


@node C interface internals, Low-Level C Interface Words, Callbacks, C Interface
@subsection How the C interface works

The documented C interface works by generating a C code out of the
declarations.

In particular, for every Forth word declared with @code{c-function}, it
generates a wrapper function in C that takes the Forth data from the Forth
stacks, and calls the target C function with these data as arguments.  The C
compiler then performs an implicit conversion between the Forth type from
the stack, and the C type for the parameter, which is given by the C
function prototype.  After the C function returns, the return value is
likewise implicitly converted to a Forth type and written back on the stack.

The @code{\c} lines are literally included in the C code (but without the
@code{\c}), and provide the necessary declarations so that the C compiler
knows the C types and has enough information to perform the conversion.

These wrapper functions are eventually compiled and dynamically linked into
Gforth, and then they can be called.

The libraries added with @code{add-lib} are used in the compile command line
to specify dependent libraries with @code{-l@var{lib}}, causing these
libraries to be dynamically linked when the wrapper function is linked.


@node Low-Level C Interface Words, Automated interface generation using SWIG, C interface internals, C Interface
@subsection Low-Level C Interface Words

@findex open-lib ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- u2  } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{open-lib}
@kindex open-lib
@format
@code{open-lib} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- u2 }) gforth-0.4 ``open-lib''
@end format

@findex lib-sym ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 u2 -- u3  } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{lib-sym}
@kindex lib-sym
@format
@code{lib-sym} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 u2 -- u3 }) gforth-0.4 ``lib-sym''
@end format

@findex lib-error ( @var{ -- c-addr u  } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{lib-error}
@kindex lib-error
@format
@code{lib-error} ( @i{-- c-addr u }) gforth-0.7 ``lib-error''
@end format
Error message for last failed @code{open-lib} or @code{lib-sym}.

@findex call-c ( @var{ ... w -- ...  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{call-c}
@kindex call-c
@format
@code{call-c} ( @i{... w -- ... }) gforth-0.2 ``call-c''
@end format
Call the C function pointed to by @i{w}. The C function has to access the
stack itself. The stack pointers are exported into a ptrpair structure
passed to the C function, and returned in that form.


@node Automated interface generation using SWIG, Migrating the C interface from earlier Gforth, Low-Level C Interface Words, C Interface
@subsection Automated interface generation using SWIG

SWIG, the Simple Wrapper Interface Generator, is used to create C interfaces
for a lot of programming languages.  The SWIG version extended with a Forth
module can be found on @uref{https://github.com/GeraldWodni/swig,github}.

@subsubsection Basic operation
C-headers are parsed and converted to Forth-Sourcecode which uses the
previously describe C interface functions.

@subsubsection Detailed operation:
@enumerate 1
@item Select a target, in this example we are using @code{example.h}
@item Create an interface file for the header. This can be used to pass options, switches and define variables.
    In the simplest case it just instructs to translate all of
@code{example.h}:@/
@example
%module example
%insert("include")
@{
    #include "example.h"
@}
%include "example.h"
@end example
@item Use SWIG to create a @code{.fsi-c} file. @*
    @code{swig -forth -stackcomments -use-structs -enumcomments -o example-fsi.c
example.i}. @* FSI stands ``Forth Source Independent'' meaning it can be
transferred to any host having a C-compiler. SWIG is not required past this
point.
@item On the target machine compile the @code{.fsi-c} file to a @code{.fsx} (x stands for executable) @*
    @code{gcc -o example.fsx example-fsi.c} @* The compilation will resolve all
constants to the values on the target.
@item The last step is to run the executable and capture its output to a @code{.fs} ``Forth Source'' file. @*
    @code{./example.fsx -gforth > example.fs} @* This code can now be used on
the target platform.
@end enumerate

@subsubsection Examples
You can find some examples in SWIG's
@uref{https://github.com/GeraldWodni/swig/tree/master/Examples/forth, Forth
Example section}.

A lot of interface files can be found in
@uref{https://github.com/GeraldWodni/posix, Forth Posix C-Interface} and
@uref{https://github.com/GeraldWodni/forth-c-interfaces, Forth C-Interface
Modules}.

Contribution to the @uref{https://github.com/GeraldWodni/forth-c-interfaces,
Forth C-Interface Module repository} is always welcome.

@node Migrating the C interface from earlier Gforth, , Automated interface generation using SWIG, C Interface
@subsection Migrating from Gforth 0.7
@cindex Must now be used inside C-LIBRARY, see C interface doc

In this version, you can use @code{\c}, @code{c-function} and @code{add-lib}
only inside @code{c-library}...@code{end-c-library}.  @code{add-lib} now
always starts from a clean slate inside a @code{c-library}, so you don't
need to use @code{clear-libs} in most cases.

If you have a program that uses these words outside
@code{c-library}...@code{end-c-library}, just wrap them in
@code{c-library}...@code{end-c-library}.  You may have to add some instances
of @code{add-lib}, however.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Assembler and Code Words, Carnal words, C Interface, Words
@section Assembler and Code Words
@cindex assembler
@cindex code words

@menu
* Assembler Definitions::    Definitions in assembly language
* Common Assembler::         アセンブラ文法
* Common Disassembler::
* 386 Assembler::            逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* AMD64 Assembler::
* Alpha Assembler::          逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* MIPS assembler::           逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* PowerPC assembler::        逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* ARM Assembler::            逸脱(deviations)と特殊ケース
* Other assemblers::         アセンブラ自体の書き方
@end menu

@node Assembler Definitions, Common Assembler, Assembler and Code Words, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection Definitions in assembly language

Gforth provides ways to implement words in assembly language (using
@code{abi-code}...@code{end-code}), and also ways to define defining words
with arbitrary run-time behaviour (like @code{does>}), where (unlike
@code{does>}) the behaviour is not defined in Forth, but in assembly
language (with @code{;code}).

However, the machine-independent nature of Gforth poses a few problems:
First of all, Gforth runs on several architectures, so it can provide no
standard assembler. It does provide assemblers for several of the
architectures it runs on, though.  Moreover, you can use a
system-independent assembler in Gforth, or compile machine code directly
with @code{,} and @code{c,}.

Another problem is that the virtual machine registers of Gforth (the stack
pointers and the virtual machine instruction pointer) depend on the
installation and engine.  Also, which registers are free to use also depend
on the installation and engine.  So any code written to run in the context
of the Gforth virtual machine is essentially limited to the installation and
engine it was developed for (it may run elsewhere, but you cannot rely on
that).

Fortunately, you can define @code{abi-code} words in Gforth that are
portable to any Gforth running on a platform with the same calling
convention (ABI); typically this means portability to the same
architecture/OS combination, sometimes crossing OS boundaries).

@findex assembler ( @var{ --   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{assembler}
@kindex assembler
@format
@code{assembler} ( @i{--  }) tools-ext ``assembler''
@end format
A vocubulary: Replaces the wordlist at the top of the search order with the
assembler wordlist.


@findex init-asm ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{init-asm}
@kindex init-asm
@format
@code{init-asm} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``init-asm''
@end format
Pushes the assembler wordlist on the search order.


@findex abi-code ( @var{ "name" -- colon-sys   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{abi-code}
@kindex abi-code
@format
@code{abi-code} ( @i{"name" -- colon-sys  }) gforth-1.0 ``abi-code''
@end format
Start a native code definition that is called using the platform's ABI
conventions corresponding to the C-prototype:
@example
Cell *function(Cell *sp, Float **fpp);
@end example
The FP stack pointer is passed in by providing a reference to a memory
location containing the FP stack pointer and is passed out by storing the
changed FP stack pointer there (if necessary).


@findex ;abi-code ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{;abi-code}
@kindex ;abi-code
@format
@code{;abi-code} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``semicolon-abi-code''
@end format
Ends the colon definition, but at run-time also changes the last defined
word @i{X} (which must be a @code{create}d word) to call the following
native code using the platform's ABI convention corresponding to the C
prototype:
@example
 Cell *function(Cell *sp, Float **fpp, Address body);
@end example
The FP stack pointer is passed in by providing a reference to a memory
location containing the FP stack pointer and is passed out by storing the
changed FP stack pointer there (if necessary).  The parameter @i{body} is
the body of @i{X}.


@findex end-code ( @var{ colon-sys --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{end-code}
@kindex end-code
@format
@code{end-code} ( @i{colon-sys --  }) gforth-0.2 ``end-code''
@end format
End a code definition.  Note that you have to assemble the return from the
ABI call (for @code{abi-code}) or the dispatch to the next VM instruction
(for @code{code} and @code{;code})  yourself.


@findex code ( @var{ "name" -- colon-sys   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{code}
@kindex code
@format
@code{code} ( @i{"name" -- colon-sys  }) tools-ext ``code''
@end format
Start a native code definition that runs in the context of the Gforth
virtual machine (engine).  Such a definition is not portable between Gforth
installations, so we recommend using @code{abi-code} instead of
@code{code}.  You have to end a @code{code} definition with a dispatch to
the next virtual machine instruction.


@findex ;code ( @var{ compilation. colon-sys1 -- colon-sys2   } ) tools-ext
@cindex @code{;code}
@kindex ;code
@format
@code{;code} ( @i{compilation. colon-sys1 -- colon-sys2  }) tools-ext ``semicolon-code''
@end format
The code after @code{;code} becomes the behaviour of the last defined word
(which must be a @code{create}d word).  The same caveats apply as for
@code{code}, so we recommend using @code{;abi-code} instead.


@findex flush-icache ( @var{ c-addr u --  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{flush-icache}
@kindex flush-icache
@format
@code{flush-icache} ( @i{c-addr u -- }) gforth-0.2 ``flush-icache''
@end format
Make sure that the instruction cache of the processor (if there is one) does
not contain stale data at @i{c-addr} and @i{u} bytes
afterwards. @code{END-CODE} performs a @code{flush-icache}
automatically. Caveat: @code{flush-icache} might not work on your
installation; this is usually the case if direct threading is not supported
on your machine (take a look at your @file{machine.h}) and your machine has
a separate instruction cache. In such cases, @code{flush-icache} does
nothing instead of flushing the instruction cache.



If @code{flush-icache} does not work correctly, @code{abi-code} words
etc. will not work (reliably), either.

The typical usage of these words can be shown most easily by analogy to the
equivalent high-level defining words:

@example
: foo                              abi-code foo
   <high-level Forth words>              <assembler>
;                                  end-code
                                
: bar                              : bar
   <high-level Forth words>           <high-level Forth words>
   CREATE                             CREATE
      <high-level Forth words>           <high-level Forth words>
   DOES>                              ;code
      <high-level Forth words>           <assembler>
;                                  end-code
@end example

For using @code{abi-code}, take a look at the ABI documentation of your
platform to see how the parameters are passed (so you know where you get the
stack pointers) and how the return value is passed (so you know where the
data stack pointer is returned).  The ABI documentation also tells you which
registers are saved by the caller (caller-saved), so you are free to destroy
them in your code, and which registers have to be preserved by the called
word (callee-saved), so you have to save them before using them, and restore
them afterwards.  For some architectures and OSs we give short summaries of
the parts of the calling convention in the appropriate sections.  More
reverse-engineering oriented people can also find out about the passing and
returning of the stack pointers through @code{see abi-call}.

Most ABIs pass the parameters through registers, but some (in particular the
most common 386 (aka IA-32) calling conventions) pass them on the
architectural stack.  The common ABIs all pass the return value in a
register.

Other things you need to know for using @code{abi-code} is that both the
data and the FP stack grow downwards (towards lower addresses) in Gforth,
with @code{1 cells} size per cell, and @code{1 floats} size per FP value.

Here's an example of using @code{abi-code} on the 386 architecture:

@example
abi-code my+ ( n1 n2 -- n )
4 sp d) ax mov \ sp into return reg
ax )    cx mov \ tos
4 #     ax add \ update sp (pop)
cx    ax ) add \ sec = sec+tos
ret            \ return from my+
end-code
@end example

An AMD64 variant of this example can be found in @ref{AMD64 Assembler}.

Here's a 386 example that deals with FP values:

@example
abi-code my-f+ ( r1 r2 -- r )
8 sp d) cx mov  \ load address of fp
cx )    dx mov  \ load fp
.fl dx )   fld  \ r2
8 #     dx add  \ update fp
.fl dx )   fadd \ r1+r2
.fl dx )   fstp \ store r
dx    cx ) mov  \ store new fp
4 sp d) ax mov  \ sp into return reg
ret             \ return from my-f+
end-code
@end example


@node Common Assembler, Common Disassembler, Assembler Definitions, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection Common Assembler

The assemblers in Gforth generally use a postfix syntax, i.e., the
instruction name follows the operands.

The operands are passed in the usual order (the same that is used in the
manual of the architecture).  Since they all are Forth words, they have to
be separated by spaces; you can also use Forth words to compute the
operands.

The instruction names usually end with a @code{,}.  This makes it easier to
visually separate instructions if you put several of them on one line; it
also avoids shadowing other Forth words (e.g., @code{and}).

Registers are usually specified by number; e.g., (decimal) @code{11}
specifies registers R11 and F11 on the Alpha architecture (which one,
depends on the instruction).  The usual names are also available, e.g.,
@code{s2} for R11 on Alpha.

Control flow is specified similar to normal Forth code (@pxref{Arbitrary
control structures}), with @code{if,}, @code{ahead,}, @code{then,},
@code{begin,}, @code{until,}, @code{again,}, @code{cs-roll}, @code{cs-pick},
@code{else,}, @code{while,}, and @code{repeat,}.  The conditions are
specified in a way specific to each assembler.

The rest of this section is of interest mainly for those who want to define
@code{code} words (instead of the more portable @code{abi-code} words).

Note that the register assignments of the Gforth engine can change between
Gforth versions, or even between different compilations of the same Gforth
version (e.g., if you use a different GCC version).  If you are using
@code{CODE} instead of @code{ABI-CODE}, and you want to refer to Gforth's
registers (e.g., the stack pointer or TOS), I recommend defining your own
words for refering to these registers, and using them later on; then you can
adapt to a changed register assignment.

The most common use of these registers is to end a @code{code} definition
with a dispatch to the next word (the @code{next} routine).  A portable way
to do this is to jump to @code{' noop >code-address} (of course, this is
less efficient than integrating the @code{next} code and scheduling it
well).  When using @code{ABI-CODE}, you can just assemble a normal
subroutine return (but make sure you return the data stack pointer).

Another difference between Gforth versions is that the top of stack is kept
in memory in @code{gforth} and, on most platforms, in a register in
@code{gforth-fast}.  For @code{ABI-CODE} definitions, any stack caching
registers are guaranteed to be flushed to the stack, allowing you to
reliably access the top of stack in memory.

@node Common Disassembler, 386 Assembler, Common Assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection Common Disassembler
@cindex disassembler, general
@cindex gdb disassembler

You can disassemble a @code{code} word with @code{see} (@pxref{Debugging}).
You can disassemble a section of memory with

@findex discode ( @var{ addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{discode}
@kindex discode
@format
@code{discode} ( @i{addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``discode''
@end format
hook for the disassembler: disassemble u bytes of code at addr



There are two kinds of disassembler for Gforth: The Forth disassembler
(available on some CPUs) and the gdb disassembler (available on platforms
with @command{gdb} and @command{mktemp}).  If both are available, the Forth
disassembler is used by default.  If you prefer the gdb disassembler, say

@example
' disasm-gdb is discode
@end example

If neither is available, @code{discode} performs @code{dump}.

The Forth disassembler generally produces output that can be fed into the
assembler (i.e., same syntax, etc.).  It also includes additional
information in comments.  In particular, the address of the instruction is
given in a comment before the instruction.

The gdb disassembler produces output in the same format as the gdb
@code{disassemble} command (@pxref{Machine Code,,Source and machine
code,gdb,Debugging with GDB}), in the default flavour (AT&T syntax for the
386 and AMD64 architectures).

@code{See} may display more or less than the actual code of the word,
because the recognition of the end of the code is unreliable.  You can use
@code{discode} if it did not display enough.  It may display more, if the
code word is not immediately followed by a named word.  If you have
something else there, you can follow the word with @code{align latest ,} to
ensure that the end is recognized.

@node 386 Assembler, AMD64 Assembler, Common Disassembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection 386 Assembler

The 386 assembler included in Gforth was written by Bernd Paysan, it's
available under GPL, and originally part of bigFORTH.

The 386 disassembler included in Gforth was written by Andrew McKewan and is
in the public domain.

The disassembler displays code in an Intel-like prefix syntax.

The assembler uses a postfix syntax with AT&T-style parameter order (i.e.,
destination last).

The assembler includes all instruction of the Athlon, i.e. 486 core
instructions, Pentium and PPro extensions, floating point, MMX, 3Dnow!, but
not ISSE. It's an integrated 16- and 32-bit assembler. Default is 32 bit,
you can switch to 16 bit with .86 and back to 32 bit with .386.

There are several prefixes to switch between different operation sizes,
@code{.b} for byte accesses, @code{.w} for word accesses, @code{.d} for
double-word accesses. Addressing modes can be switched with @code{.wa} for
16 bit addresses, and @code{.da} for 32 bit addresses. You don't need a
prefix for byte register names (@code{AL} et al).

For floating point operations, the prefixes are @code{.fs} (IEEE single),
@code{.fl} (IEEE double), @code{.fx} (extended), @code{.fw} (word),
@code{.fd} (double-word), and @code{.fq} (quad-word).  The default is
@code{.fx}, so you need to specify @code{.fl} explicitly when dealing with
Gforth FP values.

The MMX opcodes don't have size prefixes, they are spelled out like in the
Intel assembler. Instead of move from and to memory, there are PLDQ/PLDD and
PSTQ/PSTD.

The registers lack the 'e' prefix; even in 32 bit mode, eax is called ax.
Immediate values are indicated by postfixing them with @code{#}, e.g.,
@code{3 #}.  Here are some examples of addressing modes in various syntaxes:

@example
Gforth          Intel (NASM)   AT&T (gas)      Name
.w ax           ax             %ax             register (16 bit)
ax              eax            %eax            register (32 bit)
3 #             offset 3       $3              immediate
1000 #)         byte ptr 1000  1000            displacement
bx )            [ebx]          (%ebx)          base
100 di d)       100[edi]       100(%edi)       base+displacement
20 ax *4 i#)    20[eax*4]      20(,%eax,4)     (index*scale)+displacement
di ax *4 i)     [edi][eax*4]   (%edi,%eax,4)   base+(index*scale)
4 bx cx di)     4[ebx][ecx]    4(%ebx,%ecx)    base+index+displacement
12 sp ax *2 di) 12[esp][eax*2] 12(%esp,%eax,2) base+(index*scale)+displacement
@end example

You can use @code{L)} and @code{LI)} instead of @code{D)} and @code{DI)} to
enforce 32-bit displacement fields (useful for later patching).

Some example of instructions are:

@example
ax bx mov             \ move ebx,eax
3 # ax mov            \ mov eax,3
100 di d) ax mov      \ mov eax,100[edi]
4 bx cx di) ax mov    \ mov eax,4[ebx][ecx]
.w ax bx mov          \ mov bx,ax
@end example

The following forms are supported for binary instructions:

@example
<reg> <reg> <inst>
<n> # <reg> <inst>
<mem> <reg> <inst>
<reg> <mem> <inst>
<n> # <mem> <inst>
@end example

The shift/rotate syntax is:

@example
<reg/mem> 1 # shl \ shortens to shift without immediate
<reg/mem> 4 # shl
<reg/mem> cl shl
@end example

Precede string instructions (@code{movs} etc.) with @code{.b} to get the
byte version.

The control structure words @code{IF} @code{UNTIL} etc. must be preceded by
one of these conditions: @code{vs vc u< u>= 0= 0<> u<= u> 0< 0>= ps pc < >=
<= >}. (Note that most of these words shadow some Forth words when
@code{assembler} is in front of @code{forth} in the search path, e.g., in
@code{code} words).  Currently the control structure words use one stack
item, so you have to use @code{roll} instead of @code{cs-roll} to shuffle
them (you can also use @code{swap} etc.).

Based on the Intel ABI (used in Linux), @code{abi-code} words can find the
data stack pointer at @code{4 sp d)}, and the address of the FP stack
pointer at @code{8 sp d)}; the data stack pointer is returned in @code{ax};
@code{Ax}, @code{cx}, and @code{dx} are caller-saved, so you do not need to
preserve their values inside the word.  You can return from the word with
@code{ret}, the parameters are cleaned up by the caller.

For examples of 386 @code{abi-code} words, see @ref{Assembler Definitions}.


@node AMD64 Assembler, Alpha Assembler, 386 Assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection AMD64 (x86_64) Assembler

The AMD64 assembler is a slightly modified version of the 386 assembler, and
as such shares most of the syntax.  Two new prefixes, @code{.q} and
@code{.qa}, are provided to select 64-bit operand and address sizes
respectively.  64-bit sizes are the default, so normally you only have to
use the other prefixes.  Also there are additional register operands
@code{R8}-@code{R15}.

The registers lack the 'e' or 'r' prefix; even in 64 bit mode, @code{rax} is
called @code{ax}.  Additional register operands are available to refer to
the lowest-significant byte of all registers: @code{R8L}-@code{R15L},
@code{SPL}, @code{BPL}, @code{SIL}, @code{DIL}.

@c source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#AMD64_ABI_convention
The Linux-AMD64 calling convention is to pass the first 6 integer parameters
in rdi, rsi, rdx, rcx, r8 and r9 and to return the result in rax and rdx; to
pass the first 8 FP parameters in xmm0--xmm7 and to return FP results in
xmm0--xmm1.  So @code{abi-code} words get the data stack pointer in
@code{di} and the address of the FP stack pointer in @code{si}, and return
the data stack pointer in @code{ax}.  The other caller-saved registers are:
r10, r11, xmm8-xmm15.  This calling convention reportedly is also used in
other non-Microsoft OSs.

@c source: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/9b372w95(v=VS.90).aspx
Windows x64 passes the first four integer parameters in rcx, rdx, r8 and r9
and return the integer result in rax.  The other caller-saved registers are
r10 and r11.

On the Linux platform, according to
@url{https://uclibc.org/docs/psABI-x86_64.pdf} page 21 the registers AX CX
DX SI DI R8 R9 R10 R11 are available for scratch.

The addressing modes for the AMD64 are:

@example
\ running word A produces a memory error as the registers are not initialised ;-)
ABI-CODE A  ( -- )
    500        #               AX  MOV     \ immediate
        DX              AX  MOV     \ register
        200             AX  MOV     \ direct addressing
        DX  )           AX  MOV     \ indirect addressing
    40  DX  D)          AX  MOV     \ base with displacement
        DX  CX      I)  AX  MOV     \ scaled index
        DX  CX  *4  I)  AX  MOV     \ scaled index
    40  DX  CX  *4  DI) AX  MOV     \ scaled index with displacement

        DI              AX  MOV     \ SP Out := SP in
                            RET
END-CODE
@end example

Here are a few examples of an AMD64 @code{abi-code} words:

@example
abi-code my+  ( n1 n2 -- n3 )
\ SP passed in di, returned in ax,  address of FP passed in si
8 di d) ax lea        \ compute new sp in result reg
di )    dx mov        \ get old tos
dx    ax ) add        \ add to new tos
ret
end-code
@end example

@example
\ Do nothing
ABI-CODE aNOP  ( -- )
       DI  )       AX      LEA          \ SP out := SP in  
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Drop TOS
ABI-CODE aDROP  ( n -- )
   8   DI  D)      AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin - 1
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Push 5 on the data stack
ABI-CODE aFIVE   ( -- 5 )
   -8  DI  D)      AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin + 1
   5   #           AX  )   MOV          \ TOS := 5
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Push 10 and 20 into data stack
ABI-CODE aTOS2  ( -- n n )
   -16 DI  D)      AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin + 2
   10  #       8   AX  D)  MOV          \ TOS - 1 := 10
   20  #           AX  )   MOV          \ TOS := 20
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Get Time Stamp Counter as two 32 bit integers
\ The TSC is incremented every CPU clock pulse
ABI-CODE aRDTSC   ( -- TSCl TSCh )
                           RDTSC        \ DX:AX := TSC
   $FFFFFFFF #     AX      AND          \ Clear upper 32 bit AX
  0xFFFFFFFF #     DX      AND          \ Clear upper 32 bit DX
       AX          R8      MOV          \ Tempory save AX
   -16 DI  D)      AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin + 2
       R8      8   AX  D)  MOV          \ TOS-1 := saved AX = TSC low
       DX          AX  )   MOV          \ TOS := Dx = TSC high
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Get Time Stamp Counter as 64 bit integer
ABI-CODE RDTSC   ( -- TSC )
                           RDTSC        \ DX:AX := TSC
   $FFFFFFFF #     AX      AND          \ Clear upper 32 bit AX
   32  #           DX      SHL          \ Move lower 32 bit DX to upper 32 bit
       AX          DX      OR           \ Combine AX wit DX in DX
   -8  DI  D)      AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin + 1
       DX          AX  )   MOV          \ TOS := DX
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
VARIABLE V

\ Assign 4 to variable V
ABI-CODE V=4 ( -- )
       BX                  PUSH         \ Save BX, used by gforth
   V   #           BX      MOV          \ BX := address of V
   4   #           BX )    MOV          \ Write 4 to V
       BX                  POP          \ Restore BX
       DI  )       AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
VARIABLE V

\ Assign 5 to variable V
ABI-CODE V=5 ( -- )
   V   #           CX      MOV          \ CX := address of V
   5   #           CX )    MOV          \ Write 5 to V
   DI )            AX      LEA          \ SPout := SPin
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
ABI-CODE TEST2  ( -- n n )
   -16 DI  D)  AX          LEA          \ SPout := SPin + 2
   5   #       CX          MOV          \ CX := 5
   5   #       CX          CMP
   0= IF
       1   #   8   AX  D)      MOV      \ If CX = 5 then TOS - 1 := 1  <--
   ELSE
       2   #   8   AX  D)      MOV      \ else TOS - 1 := 2
   THEN
   6   #       CX          CMP
   0= IF
       3   #       AX  )       MOV      \ If CX = 6 then TOS := 3
   ELSE
       4   #       AX  )       MOV      \ else TOS := 4  <--
   THEN
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example


@example
\ Do four loops. Expect : ( 4 3 2 1 -- )
ABI-CODE LOOP4  ( -- n n n n )
       DI          AX      MOV          \ SPout := SPin
   4   #           DX      MOV          \ DX := 4  loop counter
   BEGIN
       8   #           AX      SUB      \ SP := SP + 1
           DX          AX  )   MOV      \ TOS := DX
       1   #           DX      SUB      \ DX := DX - 1
   0= UNTIL
                           RET
END-CODE
@end example

Here's a AMD64 example that deals with FP values:

@example
abi-code my-f+  ( r1 r2 -- r )
\ SP passed in di, returned in ax,  address of FP passed in si
si )       dx mov         \ load fp
8 dx d)  xmm0 movsd       \ r2
dx )     xmm0 addsd       \ r1+r2
xmm0  8 dx d) movsd       \ store r
8 #      si ) add         \ update fp
di         ax mov         \ sp into return reg
ret
end-code
@end example

@node Alpha Assembler, MIPS assembler, AMD64 Assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection Alpha Assembler

The Alpha assembler and disassembler were originally written by Bernd
Thallner.

The register names @code{a0}--@code{a5} are not available to avoid shadowing
hex numbers.

Immediate forms of arithmetic instructions are distinguished by a @code{#}
just before the @code{,}, e.g., @code{and#,} (note: @code{lda,} does not
count as arithmetic instruction).

You have to specify all operands to an instruction, even those that other
assemblers consider optional, e.g., the destination register for @code{br,},
or the destination register and hint for @code{jmp,}.

You can specify conditions for @code{if,} by removing the first @code{b} and
the trailing @code{,} from a branch with a corresponding name; e.g.,

@example
11 fgt if, \ if F11>0e
  ...
endif,
@end example

@code{fbgt,} gives @code{fgt}.  

@node MIPS assembler, PowerPC assembler, Alpha Assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection MIPS assembler

The MIPS assembler was originally written by Christian Pirker.

Currently the assembler and disassembler covers most of the MIPS32
architecture and doesn't support FP instructions.

The register names @code{$a0}--@code{$a3} are not available to avoid
shadowing hex numbers.  Use register numbers @code{$4}--@code{$7} instead.

Nothing distinguishes registers from immediate values.  Use explicit opcode
names with the @code{i} suffix for instructions with immediate argument.
E.g. @code{addiu,} in place of @code{addu,}.

Where the architecture manual specifies several formats for the instruction
(e.g., for @code{jalr,}),use the one with more arguments (i.e. two for
@code{jalr,}).  When in doubt, see @code{arch/mips/testasm.fs} for an
example of correct use.

Branches and jumps in the MIPS architecture have a delay slot.  You have to
fill it manually (the simplest way is to use @code{nop,}), the assembler
does not do it for you (unlike @command{as}).  Even @code{if,},
@code{ahead,}, @code{until,}, @code{again,}, @code{while,}, @code{else,} and
@code{repeat,} need a delay slot.  Since @code{begin,} and @code{then,} just
specify branch targets, they are not affected.  For branches the argument
specifying the target is a relative address.  Add the address of the delay
slot to get the absolute address.

Note that you must not put branches nor jumps (nor control-flow
instructions) into the delay slot.  Also it is a bad idea to put pseudo-ops
such as @code{li,} into a delay slot, as these may expand to several
instructions.  The MIPS I architecture also had load delay slots, and newer
MIPSes still have restrictions on using @code{mfhi,} and @code{mflo,}.  Be
careful to satisfy these restrictions, the assembler does not do it for you.

Some example of instructions are:

@example
$ra  12 $sp  sw,         \ sw    ra,12(sp)
$4    8 $s0  lw,         \ lw    a0,8(s0)
$v0  $0  lui,            \ lui   v0,0x0
$s0  $s4  $12  addiu,    \ addiu s0,s4,0x12
$s0  $s4  $4  addu,      \ addu  s0,s4,$a0
$ra  $t9  jalr,          \ jalr  t9
@end example

You can specify the conditions for @code{if,} etc. by taking a conditional
branch and leaving away the @code{b} at the start and the @code{,} at the
end.  E.g.,

@example
4 5 eq if,
  ... \ do something if $4 equals $5
then,
@end example

The calling conventions for 32-bit MIPS machines is to pass the first 4
arguments in registers @code{$4}..@code{$7}, and to use
@code{$v0}-@code{$v1} for return values.  In addition to these registers, it
is ok to clobber registers @code{$t0}-@code{$t8} without saving and
restoring them.

If you use @code{jalr,} to call into dynamic library routines, you must
first load the called function's address into @code{$t9}, which is used by
position-indirect code to do relative memory accesses.

Here is an example of a MIPS32 @code{abi-code} word:

@example
abi-code my+  ( n1 n2 -- n3 )
  \ SP passed in $4, returned in $v0
  $t0  4 $4  lw,         \ load n1, n2 from stack
  $t1  0 $4  lw,    
  $t0  $t0  $t1  addu,   \ add n1+n2, result in $t0
  $t0  4 $4  sw,         \ store result (overwriting n1)
  $ra  jr,               \ return to caller
  $v0  $4  4  addiu,     \ (delay slot) return uptated SP in $v0
end-code
@end example

@node PowerPC assembler, ARM Assembler, MIPS assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection PowerPC assembler

The PowerPC assembler and disassembler were contributed by Michal Revucky.

This assembler does not follow the convention of ending mnemonic names with
a ``,'', so some mnemonic names shadow regular Forth words (in particular:
@code{and or xor fabs}); so if you want to use the Forth words, you have to
make them visible first, e.g., with @code{also forth}.

Registers are referred to by their number, e.g., @code{9} means the integer
register 9 or the FP register 9 (depending on the instruction).

Because there is no way to distinguish registers from immediate values, you
have to explicitly use the immediate forms of instructions, i.e.,
@code{addi,}, not just @code{add,}.

The assembler and disassembler usually support the most general form of an
instruction, but usually not the shorter forms (especially for branches).


@node ARM Assembler, Other assemblers, PowerPC assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection ARM Assembler

The ARM assembler includes all instruction of ARM architecture version 4,
and the BLX instruction from architecture 5.  It does not (yet)  have
support for Thumb instructions.  It also lacks support for any
co-processors.

The assembler uses a postfix syntax with the same operand order as used in
the ARM Architecture Reference Manual.  Mnemonics are suffixed by a comma.

Registers are specified by their names @code{r0} through @code{r15}, with
the aliases @code{pc}, @code{lr}, @code{sp}, @code{ip} and @code{fp}
provided for convenience.  Note that @code{ip} refers to the``intra
procedure call scratch register'' (@code{r12}) and does not refer to an
instruction pointer.  @code{sp} refers to the ARM ABI stack pointer
(@code{r13}) and not the Forth stack pointer.

Condition codes can be specified anywhere in the instruction, but will be
most readable if specified just in front of the mnemonic.  The 'S' flag is
not a separate word, but encoded into instruction mnemonics, ie. just use
@code{adds,} instead of @code{add,} if you want the status register to be
updated.

The following table lists the syntax of operands for general instructions:

@example
Gforth          normal assembler      description
123 #           #123                  immediate
r12             r12                   register
r12 4 #LSL      r12, LSL #4           shift left by immediate
r12 r1 LSL      r12, LSL r1           shift left by register
r12 4 #LSR      r12, LSR #4           shift right by immediate
r12 r1 LSR      r12, LSR r1           shift right by register
r12 4 #ASR      r12, ASR #4           arithmetic shift right
r12 r1 ASR      r12, ASR r1           ... by register
r12 4 #ROR      r12, ROR #4           rotate right by immediate
r12 r1 ROR      r12, ROR r1           ... by register
r12 RRX         r12, RRX              rotate right with extend by 1
@end example

Memory operand syntax is listed in this table:

@example
Gforth            normal assembler      description
r4 ]              [r4]                  register
r4 4 #]           [r4, #+4]             register with immediate offset
r4 -4 #]          [r4, #-4]             with negative offset
r4 r1 +]          [r4, +r1]             register with register offset
r4 r1 -]          [r4, -r1]             with negated register offset
r4 r1 2 #LSL -]   [r4, -r1, LSL #2]     with negated and shifted offset
r4 4 #]!          [r4, #+4]!            immediate preincrement
r4 r1 +]!         [r4, +r1]!            register preincrement
r4 r1 -]!         [r4, +r1]!            register predecrement
r4 r1 2 #LSL +]!  [r4, +r1, LSL #2]!    shifted preincrement
r4 -4 ]#          [r4], #-4             immediate postdecrement
r4 r1 ]+          [r4], r1              register postincrement
r4 r1 ]-          [r4], -r1             register postdecrement
r4 r1 2 #LSL ]-   [r4], -r1, LSL #2     shifted postdecrement
' xyz >body [#]   xyz                   PC-relative addressing
@end example

Register lists for load/store multiple instructions are started and
terminated by using the words @code{@{} and @code{@}} respectively.  Between
braces, register names can be listed one by one or register ranges can be
formed by using the postfix operator @code{r-r}.  The @code{^} flag is not
encoded in the register list operand, but instead directly encoded into the
instruction mnemonic, ie. use @code{^ldm,} and @code{^stm,}.

Addressing modes for load/store multiple are not encoded as instruction
suffixes, but instead specified like an addressing mode, Use one of
@code{DA}, @code{IA}, @code{DB}, @code{IB}, @code{DA!}, @code{IA!},
@code{DB!} or @code{IB!}.

The following table gives some examples:

@example
Gforth                           normal assembler
r4 ia  @{ r0 r7 r8 @}  stm,        stmia    r4, @{r0,r7,r8@}
r4 db!  @{ r0 r7 r8 @}  ldm,       ldmdb    r4!, @{r0,r7,r8@}
sp ia!  @{ r0 r15 r-r @}  ^ldm,    ldmfd    sp!, @{r0-r15@}^
@end example

Control structure words typical for Forth assemblers are available:
@code{if,} @code{ahead,} @code{then,} @code{else,} @code{begin,}
@code{until,} @code{again,} @code{while,} @code{repeat,}
@code{repeat-until,}.  Conditions are specified in front of these words:

@example
r1 r2 cmp,    \ compare r1 and r2
eq if,        \ equal?
   ...          \ code executed if r1 == r2
then,
@end example

Example of a definition using the ARM assembler:

@example
abi-code my+ ( n1 n2 --  n3 )
   \ arm abi: r0=SP, r1=&FP, r2,r3,r12 saved by caller
   r0 IA!  @{ r2 r3 @}  ldm,     \ pop r2 = n2, r3 = n1
   r3  r2  r3         add,     \ r3 = n1+n1
   r3  r0 -4 #]!      str,     \ push r3
   pc  lr             mov,     \ return to caller, new SP in r0
end-code
@end example

@c !! ARM64
@c !! RISC-V

@node Other assemblers, , ARM Assembler, Assembler and Code Words
@subsection Other assemblers

If you want to contribute another assembler/disassembler, please contact us
(@email{anton@@mips.complang.tuwien.ac.at}) to check if we have such an
assembler already.  If you are writing them from scratch, please use a
similar syntax style as the one we use (i.e., postfix, commas at the end of
the instruction names, @pxref{Common Assembler}); make the output of the
disassembler be valid input for the assembler, and keep the style similar to
the style we used.

Hints on implementation: The most important part is to have a good test
suite that contains all instructions.  Once you have that, the rest is
easy.  For actual coding you can take a look at @file{arch/mips/disasm.fs}
to get some ideas on how to use data for both the assembler and
disassembler, avoiding redundancy and some potential bugs.  You can also
look at that file (and @pxref{Advanced does> usage example}) to get ideas
how to factor a disassembler.

Start with the disassembler, because it's easier to reuse data from the
disassembler for the assembler than the other way round.

For the assembler, take a look at @file{arch/alpha/asm.fs}, which shows how
simple it can be.




@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Carnal words, Passing Commands to the OS, Assembler and Code Words, Words
@section Carnal words

These words deal with the mechanics of Gforth (in Forth circles called
``carnal knowledge'' of a Forth system), but we consider them stable enough
to document them.

@menu
* Header fields::
* Header methods::
* Threading Words::          
@end menu

@node Header fields, Header methods, Carnal words, Carnal words
@subsection Header fields
@cindex header fields

In Gforth 1.0 we switched to a new word header layout.  For a detailed
description, read: Bernd Paysan and M. Anton Ertl.
@cite{@uref{http://www.euroforth.org/ef19/papers/paysan.pdf,The new Gforth
header}}. In 35th EuroForth Conference, pages 5-20, 2019.  Since this paper
was published, xt and nt have been changed to point to the parameter field,
like the body, but otherwise it is still up-to-date.

This section explains just the data structure and the words used to access
it.  A header has the following fields:

@example
name
>f+c
>link
>cfa
>namehm
>body
@end example

Currently Gforth has the names shown above for getting from the xt/nt/body
to the field, but apart from the standard @code{>body} they are not stable
Gforth words.  Instead, we provide access words.  Note that the documented
access words have survived the reorganization of the header layout.

Some of the words expect an nt, some expect an xt.  Given that both nt and
xt point to the body of a word, what is the difference? For most words, the
xt and nt use the same header, and with nt=xt, they point to the same
place.  However, for a synonym (@pxref{Aliases}) there is a difference;
consider the example

@example
create x
synonym y x
synonym z y
@end example

In this case the nt of @code{z} points to the body of @code{z}, while the xt
of @code{z} points to the body of @code{x}.  Words defined with @code{alias}
or @code{forward} (@pxref{Forward}) also have different nts and xts.

The name field is variable-length and is accessed with @code{name>string}
(@pxref{Name token}).

The @code{>f+c} field contains flags and the name length (count).  You read
the count with @code{name>string}, and the flags with

@findex compile-only? ( @var{ nt -- flag   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{compile-only?}
@kindex compile-only?
@format
@code{compile-only?} ( @i{nt -- flag  }) gforth-1.0 ``compile-only?''
@end format
true if @i{nt} is marked as compile-only.



The @code{>link} field contains a link to the previous word in the same word
list.  You can read it with @code{name>link} (@pxref{Name token}).

The name, @code{>f+c} and @code{>link} fields are not present for
@code{noname} words, but @code{name>string} and @code{name>link} work
nevertheless, producing 0 0 and 0, respectively.

The @code{>cfa} field (aka code field) contains the code address used for
@code{execute}ing the word; you can read it with @code{>code-address} and
write it with @code{code-address!} (@pxref{Threading Words}).

The @code{>namehm} field contains the address of the header methods table,
described below.  You access it by performing or accessing header methods
(@pxref{Header methods}).

The @code{>body} (aka parameter) field contains data or threaded code
specific to the word type; its length depends on the word type.  E.g., for a
@code{constant} it contains a cell with the value of the constant.  You can
access it through @code{>body} (@pxref{CREATE..DOES> details}), but this is
only standard for words you defined with @code{create}.

@node Header methods, Threading Words, Header fields, Carnal words
@subsection Header methods
@cindex header methods

The new Gforth word header is object-oriented and supports the following
methods (method selectors):

@example
.hm label method          overrider        field
          execute         set-execute      >cfa
opt:      opt-compile,    set-optimizer    >hmcompile,
to:       (to)            set-to           >hmto
extra:                                     >hmextra
>int:     name>interpret  set->int         >hm>int
>comp:    name>compile    set->comp        >hm>comp
>string:  name>string     set-name>string  >hm>string
>link:    name>link       set-name>link    >hm>link
@end example

Many of these words are not stable Gforth words, but Gforth has stable
higher-level words that we mention below.

You can look at the header methods of a word with

@findex .hm ( @var{ nt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{.hm}
@kindex .hm
@format
@code{.hm} ( @i{nt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``dot-h-m''
@end format
print the header methods of @i{nt}



Overrider (setter) words change the method implementation for the most
recent definition.  Quotations or closures restore the previous most recent
definition when they are completed, so they are not considered most recent,
and you can do things like:

@example
: my2dup over over ;
[: drop ]] over over [[ ;] set-optimizer
@end example

The @code{execute} method is actually stored in the @code{>cfa} field in the
header rather than in the header-methods table for performance reasons; also
it is implemented through a native-code address, while the other methods are
implemented by calling an xt.  The high-level way to set this method is

@findex set-execute ( @var{ ca --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-execute}
@kindex set-execute
@format
@code{set-execute} ( @i{ca --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-execute''
@end format
Changes the current word such that it jumps to the native code at @i{ca}.
Also changes the @code{compile,} implementation to the most general (and
slowest) one.  Call @code{set-optimizer} afterwards if you want a more
efficient @code{compile,} implementation.



To get a code address for use with @code{set-execute}, you can use words
like @code{docol:} or @code{>code-address}, @xref{Threading Words}.

As an alternative to @code{set-execute}, there is also @code{set-does>}
(@pxref{User-defined Defining Words}), which takes an xt.

Moreover, there are the low-level @code{code-address!} and @code{definer!}
(@pxref{Threading Words}).

The @code{opt-compile,} method is what @code{compile,} does on most Gforth
engines (@code{gforth-itc} uses @code{,} instead).  You can define a more
efficient implementation of @code{compile,} for the current word with
@code{set-optimizer} (@pxref{User-defined compile-comma}).  Note that the
end result must be equivalent to @code{postpone literal postpone execute}.

As an example of the use of @code{set-optimizer}, consider the following
definition of @code{constant}:

@example
: constant ( n "name" -- ; name: -- n )
  create ,
  ['] @@ set-does>
;

5 constant five
: foo five ; see foo
@end example

The Forth system does not know that the value of a constant must not be
changed, and just sees a @code{create}d word (which can be changed with
@code{>body}), and @code{foo} first pushes the body address of @code{five}
and then fetches from there.  With @code{set-optimizer} the definition of
@code{constant} can be optimized as follows:

@example
: constant ( n "name" -- ; name: -- n )
  create ,
  ['] @@ set-does>
  [: >body @@ postpone literal ;] set-optimizer
;
@end example

Now @code{foo} contains the literal 5 rather than a call to @code{five}.

Note that @code{set-execute} and @code{set-does>} perform
@code{set-optimizer} themselves in order to ensure that @code{execute} and
@code{compile,} agree, so if you want to add your own optimizer, you should
add it afterwards.

The @code{defer!} (aka @code{(to)} method (@pxref{User-defined TO and
DEFER@@}) implements @code{defer!} for words defined with @code{defer} and
similar words, but it is also the core of @code{to}.  The general stack
effect of the @code{defer!}/@code{(to)} method is @code{( val xt -- )},
where @i{xt} identifies the word stored into, and @i{val} is the value (of
appropriate type) stored there.

E.g., one can implement @code{fvalue} as follows:

@example
: fvalue-to ( r xt -- ) >body f! ;

: fvalue ( r -- )
  create f,
  ['] f@@ set-does>
  ['] fvalue-to set-to ;

5e fvalue foo
: bar foo 1e f+ to foo ;
see bar
@end example

You can improve the generated code with @code{set-optimizer}:

@example
: compile-fvalue-to ( xt-value-to -- )
  drop ]] >body f! [[ ;
  
: fvalue-to ( r xt -- ) >body f! ;
' compile-fvalue-to set-optimizer

: fvalue ( r -- )
  create f,
  ['] f@@ set-does>
  [: >body ]] literal f@@ [[ ;] set-optimizer
  ['] fvalue-to set-to ;

5e fvalue foo
: bar foo 1e f+ to foo ;
see bar
@end example

In practice Gforth has a few additional twists to implement, e.g.,
@code{+TO}.

@code{Set-defer@@} (@pxref{User-defined TO and DEFER@@}) allows to implement
variants of the @code{defer@@} (@pxref{Deferred Words})  method for
@code{defer}-like words.

The @code{>hmextra} field is used for cases where additional data needs to
be stored in the header methods table.  In particular, it stores the xt
passed to @code{set-does>} (and @code{does>} calls @code{set-does>}) and the
code address behind @code{;abi-code}.

The methods above all consume an xt, not an nt, but the override words work
on the most recent definition.  This means that if you use, e.g.,
@code{set-optimizer} on a synonym, the effect will probably not be what you
intended: When @code{compile,}ing the xt of the word, the
@code{opt-compile,} implementation of the original word will be used, not
the freshly-set one of the synonym.

The following methods consume an nt.

The @code{name>interpret} method is implemented as noop for most words,
except synonyms and similar words.

@findex set->int ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set->int}
@kindex set->int
@format
@code{set->int} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-to-int''
@end format
Sets the implementation of the @code{name>interpret ( nt -- xt2 )} method of
the current word to @i{xt}.



The @code{name>compile} method produces the compilation semantics of the
nt.  By changing it with @code{set->comp}, you can change the compilation
semantics, but it's not as simple as just pushing the xt of the desired
compilation semantics, because of the stack effect of @code{name>compile}.
Generally you should avoid changing the compilation semantics, and if you
do, use a higher-level word like @code{immediate} or
@code{interpret/compile:}, @xref{Combined words}.

@findex set->comp ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set->comp}
@kindex set->comp
@format
@code{set->comp} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-to-comp''
@end format
Sets the implementation of the @code{name>compile ( nt -- w xt2 )} method of
the current word to @i{xt}.


@findex immediate? ( @var{ nt -- flag   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{immediate?}
@kindex immediate?
@format
@code{immediate?} ( @i{nt -- flag  }) gforth-1.0 ``immediate?''
@end format
true if the word @i{nt} has non-default compilation semantics (that's not
quite according to the definition of immediacy, but many people mean that
when they call a word ``immediate'').



@code{Name>string} and @code{Name>link} are methods in order to make it
possible to eliminate the name, @code{>f+c} and @code{link} fields from
noname headers, but still produce meaningful results when using these
words.  You will typically not change the implementations of these methods
except with @code{noname}, but we still have

@findex set-name>string ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-name>string}
@kindex set-name>string
@format
@code{set-name>string} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-name-to-string''
@end format
Sets the implementation of the @code{name>string ( nt -- addr u )} method of
the current word to @i{xt}.


@findex set-name>link ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{set-name>link}
@kindex set-name>link
@format
@code{set-name>link} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-1.0 ``set-name-to-link''
@end format
Sets the implementation of the @code{name>link ( nt1 -- nt2|0 )} method of
the current word to @i{xt}.



@node Threading Words, , Header methods, Carnal words
@subsection Threading Words
@cindex threading words

@cindex code field
@cindex CFA
@cindex code address
The terminology used here stems from indirect threaded Forth systems; in
such a system, the XT of a word is represented by the CFA (code field
address) of a word; the CFA points to a cell that contains the code
address.  The code address is the address of some machine code that performs
the run-time action of invoking the word (e.g., the @code{dovar:} routine
pushes the address of the body of the word (a variable) on the stack).

These words provide access to code fields, code addresses and other
threading stuff in Gforth. It more or less abstracts away the differences
between direct and indirect threading.

Up to and including Gforth 0.7, the code address (plus, for
@code{does>}-defined words, the address returned by @code{>does-code})  was
sufficient to know the type of the word.  However, since Gforth-1.0 the
behaviour or at least implementation of words like @code{compile,} and
@code{name>compile} can be determined independently as described in
@ref{Header methods}.

The following words for create a code field and at the same time initialize
the header methods:

@findex hmcopy, ( @var{ xt --   } ) gforth-experimental
@cindex @code{hmcopy,}
@kindex hmcopy,
@format
@code{hmcopy,} ( @i{xt --  }) gforth-experimental ``hmcopy-comma''
@end format
While constructing a header, allocate the code field, and use @i{xt} as
prototype for setting the code field and the header methods.


@findex docol, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{docol,}
@kindex docol,
@format
@code{docol,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``docol,''
@end format
The code address of a colon definition.


@findex docon, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{docon,}
@kindex docon,
@format
@code{docon,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``docon,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CONSTANT}.


@findex dovar, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dovar,}
@kindex dovar,
@format
@code{dovar,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``dovar,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CREATE}d word.


@findex douser, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{douser,}
@kindex douser,
@format
@code{douser,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``douser,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{USER} variable.


@findex dodefer, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dodefer,}
@kindex dodefer,
@format
@code{dodefer,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``dodefer,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{defer}ed word.


@findex dofield, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dofield,}
@kindex dofield,
@format
@code{dofield,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``dofield,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{field}.


@findex dovalue, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{dovalue,}
@kindex dovalue,
@format
@code{dovalue,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``dovalue,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CONSTANT}.


@findex doabicode, ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{doabicode,}
@kindex doabicode,
@format
@code{doabicode,} ( @i{--  }) gforth-1.0 ``doabicode,''
@end format
The code address of a @code{ABI-CODE} definition.



For @code{does>}-defined words, use @code{hmcopy,}.

Or you use a higher-level word like @code{create-from} (@pxref{Creating from
a prototype}).

The following words were designed before the introduction of header methods,
and are therefore not the best (and recommended) way to deal with different
word types in Gforth.

In an indirect threaded Forth, you can get the code address of @i{name} with
@code{' @i{name} @@}; in Gforth you can get it with @code{' @i{name}
>code-address}, independent of the threading method.

@findex threading-method ( @var{ -- n  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{threading-method}
@kindex threading-method
@format
@code{threading-method} ( @i{-- n }) gforth-0.2 ``threading-method''
@end format
0 if the engine is direct threaded. Note that this may change during the
lifetime of an image.

@findex >code-address ( @var{ xt -- c_addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>code-address}
@kindex >code-address
@format
@code{>code-address} ( @i{xt -- c_addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``>code-address''
@end format
@i{c-addr} is the code address of the word @i{xt}.


@findex code-address! ( @var{ c_addr xt --   } ) gforth-obsolete
@cindex @code{code-address!}
@kindex code-address!
@format
@code{code-address!} ( @i{c_addr xt --  }) gforth-obsolete ``code-address!''
@end format
Change a code field with code address @i{c-addr} at @i{xt}.



The code addresses produced by various defining words are produced by the
following words:

@findex docol: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{docol:}
@kindex docol:
@format
@code{docol:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``docol:''
@end format
The code address of a colon definition.


@findex docon: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{docon:}
@kindex docon:
@format
@code{docon:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``docon:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CONSTANT}.


@findex dovar: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dovar:}
@kindex dovar:
@format
@code{dovar:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``dovar:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CREATE}d word.


@findex douser: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{douser:}
@kindex douser:
@format
@code{douser:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``douser:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{USER} variable.


@findex dodefer: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dodefer:}
@kindex dodefer:
@format
@code{dodefer:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``dodefer:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{defer}ed word.


@findex dofield: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{dofield:}
@kindex dofield:
@format
@code{dofield:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.2 ``dofield:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{field}.


@findex dovalue: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{dovalue:}
@kindex dovalue:
@format
@code{dovalue:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.7 ``dovalue:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{CONSTANT}.


@findex dodoes: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-0.6
@cindex @code{dodoes:}
@kindex dodoes:
@format
@code{dodoes:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-0.6 ``dodoes:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{DOES>}-defined word.


@findex doabicode: ( @var{ -- addr   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{doabicode:}
@kindex doabicode:
@format
@code{doabicode:} ( @i{-- addr  }) gforth-1.0 ``doabicode:''
@end format
The code address of a @code{ABI-CODE} definition.



@cindex @code{does>}-code
For a word @i{X} defined with @code{set-does>}, the code address points to
@code{dodoes:}, and the @code{>hmextra} field of the header methods contains
the xt of the word that is called after pushing the body addres of @i{X}.

If you want to know whether a word is a @code{DOES>}-defined word, and what
Forth code it executes, @code{>does-code} tells you that:

@findex >does-code ( @var{ xt1 -- xt2   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>does-code}
@kindex >does-code
@format
@code{>does-code} ( @i{xt1 -- xt2  }) gforth-0.2 ``>does-code''
@end format
If @i{xt1} is the execution token of a child of a @code{set-does>}-defined
word, @i{xt2} is the xt passed to @code{set-does>}, i.e, the xt of the word
that is executed when executing @i{xt1} (but first the body address of
@i{xt1} is pushed).  If @i{xt1} does not belong to a
@code{set-does>}-defined word, @i{xt2} is 0.



You can use the resulting @i{xt2} with @code{set-does>} (preferred) to
change the latest word or with

@findex does-code! ( @var{ xt2 xt1 --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{does-code!}
@kindex does-code!
@format
@code{does-code!} ( @i{xt2 xt1 --  }) gforth-0.2 ``does-code!''
@end format
Change @i{xt1} to be a @code{@i{xt2} set-does>}-defined word.



to change an arbitrary word.

@cindex definer
The following two words generalize @code{>code-address}, @code{>does-code},
@code{code-address!}, and @code{does-code!}:

@findex >definer ( @var{ xt -- definer   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{>definer}
@kindex >definer
@format
@code{>definer} ( @i{xt -- definer  }) gforth-0.2 ``>definer''
@end format
@var{Definer} is a unique identifier for the way the @var{xt} was defined.
Words defined with different @code{does>}-codes have different definers.
The definer can be used for comparison and in @code{definer!}.


@findex definer! ( @var{ definer xt --   } ) gforth-obsolete
@cindex @code{definer!}
@kindex definer!
@format
@code{definer!} ( @i{definer xt --  }) gforth-obsolete ``definer!''
@end format
The word represented by @var{xt} changes its behaviour to the behaviour
associated with @var{definer}.



@code{Code-address!}, @code{does-code!}, and @code{definer!} update the
@code{opt-compile,} method to a somewhat generic compiler for that word type
(in particular, primitives get the slow @code{general-compile,} method
rather than the primitive-specific @code{peephole-compile,}).

@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Passing Commands to the OS, Keeping track of Time, Carnal words, Words
@section Passing Commands to the Operating System
@cindex operating system - passing commands
@cindex shell commands

Gforth allows you to pass an arbitrary string to the host operating system
shell (if such a thing exists) for execution.

@findex sh ( @var{ "..." --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{sh}
@kindex sh
@format
@code{sh} ( @i{"..." --  }) gforth-0.2 ``sh''
@end format
Execute the rest of the command line as shell command(s).  Afterwards,
@code{$?} produces the exit status of the command.


@findex system ( @var{ c-addr u --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{system}
@kindex system
@format
@code{system} ( @i{c-addr u --  }) gforth-0.2 ``system''
@end format
Pass the string specified by @var{c-addr u} to the host operating system for
execution in a sub-shell.  Afterwards, @code{$?} produces the exit status of
the command. The value of the environment variable @code{GFORTHSYSTEMPREFIX}
(or its default value) is prepended to the string (mainly to support using
@code{command.com} as shell in Windows instead of whatever shell Cygwin uses
by default; @pxref{Environment variables}).


@findex sh-get ( @var{ c-addr u -- c-addr2 u2   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{sh-get}
@kindex sh-get
@format
@code{sh-get} ( @i{c-addr u -- c-addr2 u2  }) gforth-1.0 ``sh-get''
@end format
Run the shell command @i{addr u}; @i{c-addr2 u2} is the output of the
command.  The exit code is in @code{$?}, the output also in @code{sh$ 2@@}.


@findex $? ( @var{ -- n   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{$?}
@kindex $?
@format
@code{$?} ( @i{-- n  }) gforth-0.2 ``dollar-question''
@end format
@code{Value} -- the exit status returned by the most recently executed
@code{system} command.


@findex getenv ( @var{ c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2  } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{getenv}
@kindex getenv
@format
@code{getenv} ( @i{c-addr1 u1 -- c-addr2 u2 }) gforth-0.2 ``getenv''
@end format
The string @i{c-addr1 u1} specifies an environment variable. The string
@i{c-addr2 u2} is the host operating system's expansion of that environment
variable. If the environment variable does not exist, @i{c-addr2 u2}
specifies a string 0 characters in length.


@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Keeping track of Time, Miscellaneous Words, Passing Commands to the OS, Words
@section Keeping track of Time
@cindex time-related words

@findex ms ( @var{ n --   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{ms}
@kindex ms
@format
@code{ms} ( @i{n --  }) facility-ext ``ms''
@end format

@findex ns ( @var{ d --   } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ns}
@kindex ns
@format
@code{ns} ( @i{d --  }) gforth-1.0 ``ns''
@end format

@findex time&date ( @var{ -- nsec nmin nhour nday nmonth nyear   } ) facility-ext
@cindex @code{time&date}
@kindex time&date
@format
@code{time&date} ( @i{-- nsec nmin nhour nday nmonth nyear  }) facility-ext ``time-and-date''
@end format
Report the current time of day. Seconds, minutes and hours are numbered from
0. Months are numbered from 1.


@findex >time&date&tz ( @var{ udtime -- nsec nmin nhour nday nmonth nyear fdst ndstoff c-addrtz utz  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{>time&date&tz}
@kindex >time&date&tz
@format
@code{>time&date&tz} ( @i{udtime -- nsec nmin nhour nday nmonth nyear fdst ndstoff c-addrtz utz }) gforth-1.0 ``to-time-and-date''
@end format
Convert time in seconds since 1.1.1970 0:00Z to the current time of
day. Seconds, minutes and hours are numbered from 0.  Months are numbered
from 1.

@findex utime ( @var{ -- dtime  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{utime}
@kindex utime
@format
@code{utime} ( @i{-- dtime }) gforth-0.5 ``utime''
@end format
Report the current time in microseconds since some epoch.  Use
@code{#1000000 um/mod nip} to convert to seconds

@findex ntime ( @var{ -- dtime  } ) gforth-1.0
@cindex @code{ntime}
@kindex ntime
@format
@code{ntime} ( @i{-- dtime }) gforth-1.0 ``ntime''
@end format
Report the current time in nanoseconds since some epoch.

@findex cputime ( @var{ -- duser dsystem  } ) gforth-0.5
@cindex @code{cputime}
@kindex cputime
@format
@code{cputime} ( @i{-- duser dsystem }) gforth-0.5 ``cputime''
@end format
duser and dsystem are the respective user- and system-level CPU times used
since the start of the Forth system (excluding child processes), in
microseconds (the granularity may be much larger, however).  On platforms
without the getrusage call, it reports elapsed time (since some epoch) for
duser and 0 for dsystem.



@c -------------------------------------------------------------
@node Miscellaneous Words, , Keeping track of Time, Words
@section Miscellaneous Words
@cindex miscellaneous words

@comment TODO find homes for these

This section lists the Standard Forth words that are not documented
elsewhere in this manual. Ultimately, they all need proper homes.

@findex quit ( @var{ ?? -- ??   } ) core
@cindex @code{quit}
@kindex quit
@format
@code{quit} ( @i{?? -- ??  }) core ``quit''
@end format
Empty the return stack, make the user input device the input source, enter
interpret state and start the text interpreter.



The following Standard Forth words are not currently supported by Gforth
(@pxref{Standard conformance}):

@code{EDITOR} @code{EMIT?} @code{FORGET} 

@c ******************************************************************
@node Error messages, Tools, Words, Top
@chapter Error messages
@cindex error messages
@cindex backtrace

A typical Gforth error message looks like this:

@example
in file included from \evaluated string/:-1
in file included from ./yyy.fs:1
./xxx.fs:4: Invalid memory address
>>>bar<<<
Backtrace:
$400E664C @@
$400E6664 foo
@end example

The message identifying the error is @code{Invalid memory address}.  The
error happened when text-interpreting line 4 of the file
@file{./xxx.fs}. This line is given (it contains @code{bar}), and the word
on the line where the error happened, is pointed out (with @code{>>>} and
@code{<<<}).

The file containing the error was included in line 1 of @file{./yyy.fs}, and
@file{yyy.fs} was included from a non-file (in this case, by giving
@file{yyy.fs} as command-line parameter to Gforth).

At the end of the error message you find a return stack dump that can be
interpreted as a backtrace (possibly empty). On top you find the top of the
return stack when the @code{throw} happened, and at the bottom you find the
return stack entry just above the return stack of the topmost text
interpreter.

To the right of most return stack entries you see a guess for the word that
pushed that return stack entry as its return address. This gives a
backtrace. In our case we see that @code{bar} called @code{foo}, and
@code{foo} called @code{@@} (and @code{@@} had an @emph{Invalid memory
address} exception).

Note that the backtrace is not perfect: We don't know which return stack
entries are return addresses (so we may get false positives); and in some
cases (e.g., for @code{abort"}) we cannot determine from the return address
the word that pushed the return address, so for some return addresses you
see no names in the return stack dump.

@cindex @code{catch} and backtraces
The return stack dump represents the return stack at the time when a
specific @code{throw} was executed.  In programs that make use of
@code{catch}, it is not necessarily clear which @code{throw} should be used
for the return stack dump (e.g., consider one @code{throw} that indicates an
error, which is caught, and during recovery another error happens; which
@code{throw} should be used for the stack dump?).  Gforth presents the
return stack dump for the first @code{throw} after the last executed (not
returned-to) @code{catch} or @code{nothrow}; this works well in the usual
case. To get the right backtrace, you usually want to insert @code{nothrow}
or @code{['] false catch 2drop} after a @code{catch} if the error is not
rethrown.

@cindex @code{gforth-fast} and backtraces
@cindex @code{gforth-fast}, difference from @code{gforth}
@cindex backtraces with @code{gforth-fast}
@cindex return stack dump with @code{gforth-fast}
@code{Gforth} is able to do a return stack dump for throws generated from
primitives (e.g., invalid memory address, stack empty etc.);
@code{gforth-fast} is only able to do a return stack dump from a directly
called @code{throw} (including @code{abort} etc.).  Given an exception
caused by a primitive in @code{gforth-fast}, you will typically see no
return stack dump at all; however, if the exception is caught by
@code{catch} (e.g., for restoring some state), and then @code{throw}n again,
the return stack dump will be for the first such @code{throw}.

@code{gforth-fast} also does not attempt to differentiate between division
by zero and division overflow, because that costs time in every division.

@c ******************************************************************
@node Tools, Standard conformance, Error messages, Top
@chapter Tools

@menu
* Standard Report::          使用されたワードをワードセットごとにソートして報告します
* Stack depth changes::      このスタック値はどこから来たのか?
@end menu

See also @ref{Emacs and Gforth}.

@node Standard Report, Stack depth changes, Tools, Tools
@section @file{ans-report.fs}: Report the words used, sorted by wordset
@cindex @file{ans-report.fs}
@cindex report the words used in your program
@cindex words used in your program

If you want to label a Forth program as Standard Program, you must document
which wordsets the program uses.

The @file{ans-report.fs} tool makes it easy for you to determine which words
from which wordset and which non-standard words your application uses. You
simply have to include @file{ans-report.fs} before loading the program you
want to check. After loading your program, you can get the report with
@code{print-ans-report}. A typical use is to run this as batch job like
this:
@example
gforth ans-report.fs myprog.fs -e "print-ans-report bye"
@end example

The output looks like this (for @file{compat/control.fs}):
@example
The program uses the following words
from CORE :
: POSTPONE THEN ; immediate ?dup IF 0= 
from BLOCK-EXT :
\ 
from FILE :
( 
@end example

@file{ans-report.fs} reports both Forth-94 and Forth-2012 wordsets.  For
words that are in both standards, it reports the wordset without suffix
(e.g., @code{CORE-EXT}).  For Forth-2012-only words, it reports the wordset
with a @code{-2012} suffix (e.g., @code{CORE-EXT-2012}); and likewise for
the words that are Forth-94-only (i.e., that have been removed in
Forth-2012).

@subsection Caveats

Note that @file{ans-report.fs} just checks which words are used, not whether
they are used in a standard-conforming way!

Some words are defined in several wordsets in the
standard. @file{ans-report.fs} reports them for only one of the wordsets,
and not necessarily the one you expect. It depends on usage which wordset is
the right one to specify. E.g., if you only use the compilation semantics of
@code{S"}, it is a Core word; if you also use its interpretation semantics,
it is a File word.


@node Stack depth changes, , Standard Report, Tools
@section Stack depth changes during interpretation
@cindex @file{depth-changes.fs}
@cindex depth changes during interpretation
@cindex stack depth changes during interpretation
@cindex items on the stack after interpretation

Sometimes you notice that, after loading a file, there are items left on the
stack.  The tool @file{depth-changes.fs} helps you find out quickly where in
the file these stack items are coming from.

The simplest way of using @file{depth-changes.fs} is to include it before
the file(s) you want to check, e.g.:

@example
gforth depth-changes.fs my-file.fs
@end example

This will compare the stack depths of the data and FP stack at every empty
line (in interpretation state) against these depths at the last empty line
(in interpretation state).  If the depths are not equal, the position in the
file and the stack contents are printed with @code{~~} (@pxref{Debugging}).
This indicates that a stack depth change has occured in the paragraph of
non-empty lines before the indicated line.  It is a good idea to leave an
empty line at the end of the file, so the last paragraph is checked, too.

Checking only at empty lines usually works well, but sometimes you have big
blocks of non-empty lines (e.g., when building a big table), and you want to
know where in this block the stack depth changed.  You can check all
interpreted lines with

@example
gforth depth-changes.fs -e "' all-lines is depth-changes-filter" my-file.fs
@end example

This checks the stack depth at every end-of-line.  So the depth change
occured in the line reported by the @code{~~} (not in the line before).

Note that, while this offers better accuracy in indicating where the stack
depth changes, it will often report many intentional stack depth changes
(e.g., when an interpreted computation stretches across several lines).  You
can suppress the checking of some lines by putting backslashes at the end of
these lines (not followed by white space), and using

@example
gforth depth-changes.fs -e "' most-lines is depth-changes-filter" my-file.fs
@end example

@c ******************************************************************
@node Standard conformance, Standard vs Extensions, Tools, Top
@chapter Standard conformance
@cindex Standard conformance of Gforth

(標準適合度)私達の知る限り、 Gforth は…

ANS Forth System and a Forth-2012 System
@itemize @bullet
@item providing the Core Extensions word set
@item providing the Block word set
@item providing the Block Extensions word set
@item providing the Double-Number word set
@item providing the Double-Number Extensions word set
@item providing the Exception word set
@item providing the Exception Extensions word set
@item providing the Facility word set
@item providing the Facility Extensions word set, except @code{EMIT?}
@item providing the File Access word set
@item providing the File Access Extensions word set
@item providing the Floating-Point word set
@item providing the Floating-Point Extensions word set
@item providing the Locals word set
@item providing the Locals Extensions word set
@item providing the Memory-Allocation word set
@item providing the Memory-Allocation Extensions word set
@item providing the Programming-Tools word set
@item providing the Programming-Tools Extensions word set, except @code{EDITOR} and @code{FORGET}
@item providing the Search-Order word set
@item providing the Search-Order Extensions word set
@item providing the String word set
@item providing the String Extensions word set
@item providing the Extended-Character wordset
@end itemize

Gforth has the following environmental restrictions:

@cindex environmental restrictions
@itemize @bullet
@item
While processing the OS command line, if an exception is not caught, Gforth
exits with a non-zero exit code instead of performing QUIT.

@item
When an @code{throw} is performed after a @code{query}, Gforth does not
always restore the input source specification in effect at the corresponding
catch.

@end itemize


@cindex system documentation
In addition, Standard Forth systems are required to document certain
implementation choices. This chapter tries to meet these requirements for
the Forth-94 standard.  For the Forth-2012 standard, we decided to produce
the additional documentation only if there is demand.  So if you are really
missing this documentation, please let us know.

In many cases, the following documentation gives a way to ask the system for
the information instead of providing the information directly, in
particular, if the information depends on the processor, the operating
system or the installation options chosen, or if they are likely to change
during the maintenance of Gforth.

@comment The framework for the rest has been taken from pfe.

@menu
* The Core Words::
* The optional Block word set::
* The optional Double Number word set::
* The optional Exception word set::
* The optional Facility word set::
* The optional File-Access word set::
* The optional Floating-Point word set::
* The optional Locals word set::
* The optional Memory-Allocation word set::
* The optional Programming-Tools word set::
* The optional Search-Order word set::  
@end menu


@c =====================================================================
@node The Core Words, The optional Block word set, Standard conformance, Standard conformance
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section The Core Words
@c =====================================================================
@cindex core words, system documentation
@cindex system documentation, core words

@menu
* core-idef::                Implementation Defined Options
* core-ambcond::             あいまいな条件
* core-other::               その他のシステム・ドキュメント                  
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node core-idef, core-ambcond, The Core Words, The Core Words
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex core words, implementation-defined options
@cindex implementation-defined options, core words


@table @i
@item (Cell) aligned addresses:
@cindex cell-aligned addresses
@cindex aligned addresses
processor-dependent. Gforth's alignment words perform natural alignment
(e.g., an address aligned for a datum of size 8 is divisible by
8). Unaligned accesses usually result in a @code{-23 THROW}.

@item @code{EMIT} and non-graphic characters:
@cindex @code{EMIT} and non-graphic characters
@cindex non-graphic characters and @code{EMIT}
The character is output using the C library function (actually, macro)
@code{putc}.

@item character editing of @code{ACCEPT} and @code{EXPECT}:
@cindex character editing of @code{ACCEPT} and @code{EXPECT}
@cindex editing in @code{ACCEPT} and @code{EXPECT}
@cindex @code{ACCEPT}, editing
@cindex @code{EXPECT}, editing
This is modeled on the GNU readline library (@pxref{Readline Interaction, ,
Command Line Editing, readline, The GNU Readline Library}) with Emacs-like
key bindings. @kbd{Tab} deviates a little by producing a full word
completion every time you type it (instead of producing the common prefix of
all completions). @xref{Command-line editing}.

@item character set:
@cindex character set
The character set of your computer and display device. Gforth is 8-bit-clean
(but some other component in your system may make trouble).

@item Character-aligned address requirements:
@cindex character-aligned address requirements
installation-dependent. Currently a character is represented by a C
@code{unsigned char}; in the future we might switch to @code{wchar_t}
(Comments on that requested).

@item character-set extensions and matching of names:
@cindex character-set extensions and matching of names
@cindex case-sensitivity for name lookup
@cindex name lookup, case-sensitivity
@cindex locale and case-sensitivity
Any character except the ASCII NUL character can be used in a name. Matching
is case-insensitive (except in @code{TABLE}s). The matching is performed
using the C library function @code{strncasecmp}, whose function is probably
influenced by the locale. E.g., the @code{C} locale does not know about
accents and umlauts, so they are matched case-sensitively in that
locale. For portability reasons it is best to write programs such that they
work in the @code{C} locale. Then one can use libraries written by a Polish
programmer (who might use words containing ISO Latin-2 encoded characters)
and by a French programmer (ISO Latin-1) in the same program (of course,
@code{WORDS} will produce funny results for some of the words (which ones,
depends on the font you are using)). Also, the locale you prefer may not be
available in other operating systems. Hopefully, Unicode will solve these
problems one day.

@item conditions under which control characters match a space delimiter:
@cindex space delimiters
@cindex control characters as delimiters
If @code{word} is called with the space character as a delimiter, all
white-space characters (as identified by the C macro @code{isspace()})  are
delimiters. @code{Parse}, on the other hand, treats space like other
delimiters.  @code{Parse-name}, which is used by the outer interpreter (aka
text interpreter) by default, treats all white-space characters as
delimiters.

@item format of the control-flow stack:
@cindex control-flow stack, format
The data stack is used as control-flow stack. The size of a control-flow
stack item in cells is given by the constant @code{cs-item-size}. At the
time of this writing, an item consists of a (pointer to a) locals list
(third), an address in the code (second), and a tag for identifying the item
(TOS). The following tags are used: @code{defstart}, @code{live-orig},
@code{dead-orig}, @code{dest}, @code{do-dest}, @code{scopestart}.

@item conversion of digits > 35
@cindex digits > 35
The characters @code{[\]^_'} are the digits with the decimal value
36@minus{}41. There is no way to input many of the larger digits.

@item display after input terminates in @code{ACCEPT} and @code{EXPECT}:
@cindex @code{EXPECT}, display after end of input
@cindex @code{ACCEPT}, display after end of input
The cursor is moved to the end of the entered string. If the input is
terminated using the @kbd{Return} key, a space is typed.

@item exception abort sequence of @code{ABORT"}:
@cindex exception abort sequence of @code{ABORT"}
@cindex @code{ABORT"}, exception abort sequence
The error string is stored into the variable @code{"error} and a @code{-2
throw} is performed.

@item input line terminator:
@cindex input line terminator
@cindex line terminator on input
@cindex newline character on input
For interactive input, @kbd{C-m} (CR) and @kbd{C-j} (LF) terminate
lines. One of these characters is typically produced when you type the
@kbd{Enter} or @kbd{Return} key.

@item maximum size of a counted string:
@cindex maximum size of a counted string
@cindex counted string, maximum size
@code{s" /counted-string" environment? drop .}. Currently 255 characters on
all platforms, but this may change.

@item maximum size of a parsed string:
@cindex maximum size of a parsed string
@cindex parsed string, maximum size
Given by the constant @code{/line}. Currently 255 characters.

@item maximum size of a definition name, in characters:
@cindex maximum size of a definition name, in characters
@cindex name, maximum length
MAXU/8

@item maximum string length for @code{ENVIRONMENT?}, in characters:
@cindex maximum string length for @code{ENVIRONMENT?}, in characters
@cindex @code{ENVIRONMENT?} string length, maximum
MAXU/8

@item method of selecting the user input device:
@cindex user input device, method of selecting
The user input device is the standard input. There is currently no way to
change it from within Gforth. However, the input can typically be redirected
in the command line that starts Gforth.

@item method of selecting the user output device:
@cindex user output device, method of selecting
@code{EMIT} and @code{TYPE} output to the file-id stored in the value
@code{outfile-id} (@code{stdout} by default). Gforth uses unbuffered output
when the user output device is a terminal, otherwise the output is buffered.

@item methods of dictionary compilation:
What are we expected to document here?

@item number of bits in one address unit:
@cindex number of bits in one address unit
@cindex address unit, size in bits
@code{s" address-units-bits" environment? drop .}. 8 in all current
platforms.

@item number representation and arithmetic:
@cindex number representation and arithmetic
Processor-dependent. Binary two's complement on all current platforms.

@item ranges for integer types:
@cindex ranges for integer types
@cindex integer types, ranges
Installation-dependent. Make environmental queries for @code{MAX-N},
@code{MAX-U}, @code{MAX-D} and @code{MAX-UD}. The lower bounds for unsigned
(and positive) types is 0. The lower bound for signed types on two's
complement and one's complement machines machines can be computed by adding
1 to the upper bound.

@item read-only data space regions:
@cindex read-only data space regions
@cindex data-space, read-only regions
The whole Forth data space is writable.

@item size of buffer at @code{WORD}:
@cindex size of buffer at @code{WORD}
@cindex @code{WORD} buffer size
@code{PAD HERE - .}. 104 characters on 32-bit machines. The buffer is shared
with the pictured numeric output string. If overwriting @code{PAD} is
acceptable, it is as large as the remaining dictionary space, although only
as much can be sensibly used as fits in a counted string.

@item size of one cell in address units:
@cindex cell size
@code{1 cells .}.

@item size of one character in address units:
@cindex char size
@code{1 chars .}. 1 on all current platforms.

@item size of the keyboard terminal buffer:
@cindex size of the keyboard terminal buffer
@cindex terminal buffer, size
Varies. You can determine the size at a specific time using @code{lp@@ tib -
.}. It is shared with the locals stack and TIBs of files that include the
current file. You can change the amount of space for TIBs and locals stack
at Gforth startup with the command line option @code{-l}.

@item size of the pictured numeric output buffer:
@cindex size of the pictured numeric output buffer
@cindex pictured numeric output buffer, size
@code{PAD HERE - .}. 104 characters on 32-bit machines. The buffer is shared
with @code{WORD}.

@item size of the scratch area returned by @code{PAD}:
@cindex size of the scratch area returned by @code{PAD}
@cindex @code{PAD} size
The remainder of dictionary space. @code{unused pad here - - .}.

@item system case-sensitivity characteristics:
@cindex case-sensitivity characteristics
Dictionary searches are case-insensitive (except in @code{TABLE}s). However,
as explained above under @i{character-set extensions}, the matching for
non-ASCII characters is determined by the locale you are using. In the
default @code{C} locale all non-ASCII characters are matched
case-sensitively.

@item system prompt:
@cindex system prompt
@cindex prompt
@code{ ok} in interpret state, @code{ compiled} in compile state.

@item division rounding:
@cindex division rounding
The ordinary division words @code{/ mod /mod */ */mod} perform floored
division (with the default installation of Gforth).  You can check this with
@code{s" floored" environment? drop .}.  If you write programs that need a
specific division rounding, best use @code{fm/mod} or @code{sm/rem} for
portability.

@item values of @code{STATE} when true:
@cindex @code{STATE} values
-1.

@item values returned after arithmetic overflow:
On two's complement machines, arithmetic is performed modulo
2**bits-per-cell for single arithmetic and 4**bits-per-cell for double
arithmetic (with appropriate mapping for signed types). Division by zero
typically results in a @code{-55 throw} (Floating-point unidentified fault)
or @code{-10 throw} (divide by zero).  Integer division overflow can result
in these throws, or in @code{-11 throw}; in @code{gforth-fast} division
overflow and divide by zero may also result in returning bogus results
without producing an exception.

@item whether the current definition can be found after @t{DOES>}:
@cindex @t{DOES>}, visibility of current definition
No.

@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node core-ambcond, core-other, core-idef, The Core Words
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex core words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, core words

@table @i

@item a name is neither a word nor a number:
@cindex name not found
@cindex undefined word
@code{-13 throw} (Undefined word).

@item a definition name exceeds the maximum length allowed:
@cindex word name too long
@code{-19 throw} (Word name too long)

@item addressing a region not inside the various data spaces of the forth system:
@cindex Invalid memory address
The stacks, code space and header space are accessible. Machine code space
is typically readable. Accessing other addresses gives results dependent on
the operating system. On decent systems: @code{-9 throw} (Invalid memory
address).

@item argument type incompatible with parameter:
@cindex argument type mismatch
This is usually not caught. Some words perform checks, e.g., the control
flow words, and issue a @code{ABORT"} or @code{-12 THROW} (Argument type
mismatch).

@item attempting to obtain the execution token of a word with undefined execution semantics:
@cindex compile-only warning, for @code{'} etc.
@cindex execution token of words with undefined execution semantics
The execution token represents the interpretation semantics of the word.
Gforth defines interpretation semantics for all words; for words where the
standard does not define interpretation semantics, but defines the execution
semantics (except @code{LEAVE}), the interpretation semantics are to perform
the execution semantics.  For words where the standard defines no
interprtation semantics, but defined compilation semantics (plus
@code{LEAVE}), the interpretation semantics are to perform the compilation
semantics.  Some words are marked as compile-only, and @code{'} gives a
warning for these words.

@item dividing by zero:
@cindex dividing by zero
@cindex floating point unidentified fault, integer division
On some platforms, this produces a @code{-10 throw} (Division by zero); on
other systems, this typically results in a @code{-55 throw} (Floating-point
unidentified fault).

@item insufficient data stack or return stack space:
@cindex insufficient data stack or return stack space
@cindex stack overflow
@cindex address alignment exception, stack overflow
@cindex Invalid memory address, stack overflow
Depending on the operating system, the installation, and the invocation of
Gforth, this is either checked by the memory management hardware, or it is
not checked. If it is checked, you typically get a @code{-3 throw} (Stack
overflow), @code{-5 throw} (Return stack overflow), or @code{-9 throw}
(Invalid memory address) (depending on the platform and how you achieved the
overflow) as soon as the overflow happens. If it is not checked, overflows
typically result in mysterious illegal memory accesses, producing @code{-9
throw} (Invalid memory address) or @code{-23 throw} (Address alignment
exception); they might also destroy the internal data structure of
@code{ALLOCATE} and friends, resulting in various errors in these words.

@item insufficient space for loop control parameters:
@cindex insufficient space for loop control parameters
Like other return stack overflows.

@item insufficient space in the dictionary:
@cindex insufficient space in the dictionary
@cindex dictionary overflow
If you try to allot (either directly with @code{allot}, or indirectly with
@code{,}, @code{create} etc.) more memory than available in the dictionary,
you get a @code{-8 throw} (Dictionary overflow). If you try to access memory
beyond the end of the dictionary, the results are similar to stack
overflows.

@item interpreting a word with undefined interpretation semantics:
@cindex interpreting a word with undefined interpretation semantics
@cindex Interpreting a compile-only word
Gforth defines interpretation semantics for all words; for words where the
standard defines execution semantics (except @code{LEAVE}), the
interpretation semantics are to perform the execution semantics.  For words
where the standard defines no interprtation semantics, but defined
compilation semantics (plus @code{LEAVE}), the interpretation semantics are
to perform the compilation semantics.  Some words are marked as
compile-only, and text-interpreting them gives a warning.

@item modifying the contents of the input buffer or a string literal:
@cindex modifying the contents of the input buffer or a string literal
These are located in writable memory and can be modified.

@item overflow of the pictured numeric output string:
@cindex overflow of the pictured numeric output string
@cindex pictured numeric output string, overflow
@code{-17 throw} (Pictured numeric ouput string overflow).

@item parsed string overflow:
@cindex parsed string overflow
@code{PARSE} cannot overflow. @code{WORD} does not check for overflow.

@item producing a result out of range:
@cindex result out of range
On two's complement machines, arithmetic is performed modulo
2**bits-per-cell for single arithmetic and 4**bits-per-cell for double
arithmetic (with appropriate mapping for signed types). Division by zero
typically results in a @code{-10 throw} (divide by zero) or @code{-55 throw}
(floating point unidentified fault). Overflow on division may result in
these errors or in @code{-11 throw} (result out of range).
@code{Gforth-fast} may silently produce bogus results on division overflow
or division by zero.  @code{Convert} and @code{>number} currently overflow
silently.

@item reading from an empty data or return stack:
@cindex stack empty
@cindex stack underflow
@cindex return stack underflow
The data stack is checked by the outer (aka text) interpreter after every
word executed. If it has underflowed, a @code{-4 throw} (Stack underflow) is
performed. Apart from that, stacks may be checked or not, depending on
operating system, installation, and invocation. If they are caught by a
check, they typically result in @code{-4 throw} (Stack underflow), @code{-6
throw} (Return stack underflow) or @code{-9 throw} (Invalid memory address),
depending on the platform and which stack underflows and by how much. Note
that even if the system uses checking (through the MMU), your program may
have to underflow by a significant number of stack items to trigger the
reaction (the reason for this is that the MMU, and therefore the checking,
works with a page-size granularity).  If there is no checking, the symptoms
resulting from an underflow are similar to those from an overflow.
Unbalanced return stack errors can result in a variety of symptoms,
including @code{-9 throw} (Invalid memory address) and Illegal Instruction
(typically @code{-260 throw}).

@item unexpected end of the input buffer, resulting in an attempt to use a zero-length string as a name:
@cindex unexpected end of the input buffer
@cindex zero-length string as a name
@cindex Attempt to use zero-length string as a name
@code{Create} and its descendants perform a @code{-16 throw} (Attempt to use
zero-length string as a name). Words like @code{'} probably will not find
what they search. Note that it is possible to create zero-length names with
@code{nextname} (should it not?).

@item @code{>IN} greater than input buffer:
@cindex @code{>IN} greater than input buffer
The next invocation of a parsing word returns a string with length 0.

@item @code{RECURSE} appears after @code{DOES>}:
@cindex @code{RECURSE} appears after @code{DOES>}
Compiles a recursive call to the code after @code{DOES>}.

@item argument input source different than current input source for @code{RESTORE-INPUT}:
@cindex argument input source different than current input source for @code{RESTORE-INPUT}
@cindex argument type mismatch, @code{RESTORE-INPUT}
@cindex @code{RESTORE-INPUT}, Argument type mismatch
@code{-12 THROW}. Note that, once an input file is closed (e.g., because the
end of the file was reached), its source-id may be reused. Therefore,
restoring an input source specification referencing a closed file may lead
to unpredictable results instead of a @code{-12 THROW}.

In the future, Gforth may be able to restore input source specifications
from other than the current input source.

@item data space containing definitions gets de-allocated:
@cindex data space containing definitions gets de-allocated
Deallocation with @code{allot} is not checked. This typically results in
memory access faults or execution of illegal instructions.

@item data space read/write with incorrect alignment:
@cindex data space read/write with incorrect alignment
@cindex alignment faults
@cindex address alignment exception
Processor-dependent. Typically results in a @code{-23 throw} (Address
alignment exception). Under Linux-Intel on a 486 or later processor with
alignment turned on, incorrect alignment results in a @code{-9 throw}
(Invalid memory address). There are reportedly some processors with
alignment restrictions that do not report violations.

@item data space pointer not properly aligned, @code{,}, @code{C,}:
@cindex data space pointer not properly aligned, @code{,}, @code{C,}
Like other alignment errors.

@item less than u+2 stack items (@code{PICK} and @code{ROLL}):
Like other stack underflows.

@item loop control parameters not available:
@cindex loop control parameters not available
Not checked. The counted loop words simply assume that the top of return
stack items are loop control parameters and behave accordingly.

@item most recent definition does not have a name (@code{IMMEDIATE}):
@cindex most recent definition does not have a name (@code{IMMEDIATE})
@cindex last word was headerless
@code{abort" last word was headerless"}.

@item name not defined by @code{VALUE} used by @code{TO}:
@cindex name not defined by @code{VALUE} used by @code{TO}
@cindex @code{TO} on non-@code{VALUE}s
@cindex Invalid name argument, @code{TO}
@code{-32 throw} (Invalid name argument) (unless name is a local or was
defined by @code{CONSTANT}; in the latter case it just changes the
constant).

@item name not found (@code{'}, @code{POSTPONE}, @code{[']}, @code{[COMPILE]}):
@cindex name not found (@code{'}, @code{POSTPONE}, @code{[']}, @code{[COMPILE]})
@cindex undefined word, @code{'}, @code{POSTPONE}, @code{[']}, @code{[COMPILE]}
@code{-13 throw} (Undefined word)

@item parameters are not of the same type (@code{DO}, @code{?DO}, @code{WITHIN}):
@cindex parameters are not of the same type (@code{DO}, @code{?DO}, @code{WITHIN})
Gforth behaves as if they were of the same type. I.e., you can predict the
behaviour by interpreting all parameters as, e.g., signed.

@item @code{POSTPONE} or @code{[COMPILE]} applied to @code{TO}:
@cindex @code{POSTPONE} or @code{[COMPILE]} applied to @code{TO}
Assume @code{: X POSTPONE TO ; IMMEDIATE}. @code{X} performs the compilation
semantics of @code{TO}.

@item String longer than a counted string returned by @code{WORD}:
@cindex string longer than a counted string returned by @code{WORD}
@cindex @code{WORD}, string overflow
Not checked. The string will be ok, but the count will, of course, contain
only the least significant bits of the length.

@item u greater than or equal to the number of bits in a cell (@code{LSHIFT}, @code{RSHIFT}):
@cindex @code{LSHIFT}, large shift counts
@cindex @code{RSHIFT}, large shift counts
Processor-dependent. Typical behaviours are returning 0 and using only the
low bits of the shift count.

@item word not defined via @code{CREATE}:
@cindex @code{>BODY} of non-@code{CREATE}d words
@code{>BODY} produces the PFA of the word no matter how it was defined.

@cindex @code{DOES>} of non-@code{CREATE}d words
@code{DOES>} changes the execution semantics of the last defined word no
matter how it was defined. E.g., @code{CONSTANT DOES>} is equivalent to
@code{CREATE , DOES>}.

@item words improperly used outside @code{<#} and @code{#>}:
Not checked. As usual, you can expect memory faults.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node core-other, , core-ambcond, The Core Words
@subsection Other system documentation
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex other system documentation, core words
@cindex core words, other system documentation

@table @i
@item nonstandard words using @code{PAD}:
@cindex @code{PAD} use by nonstandard words
None.

@item operator's terminal facilities available:
@cindex operator's terminal facilities available
After processing the OS's command line, Gforth goes into interactive mode,
and you can give commands to Gforth interactively. The actual facilities
available depend on how you invoke Gforth.

@item program data space available:
@cindex program data space available
@cindex data space available
@code{UNUSED .} gives the remaining dictionary space. The total dictionary
space can be specified with the @code{-m} switch (@pxref{Invoking Gforth})
when Gforth starts up.

@item return stack space available:
@cindex return stack space available
You can compute the total return stack space in cells with @code{s"
RETURN-STACK-CELLS" environment? drop .}. You can specify it at startup time
with the @code{-r} switch (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}).

@item stack space available:
@cindex stack space available
You can compute the total data stack space in cells with @code{s"
STACK-CELLS" environment? drop .}. You can specify it at startup time with
the @code{-d} switch (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}).

@item system dictionary space required, in address units:
@cindex system dictionary space required, in address units
Type @code{here forthstart - .} after startup. At the time of this writing,
this gives 80080 (bytes) on a 32-bit system.
@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Block word set, The optional Double Number word set, The Core Words, Standard conformance
@section The optional Block word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, block words
@cindex block words, system documentation

@menu
* block-idef::               Implementation Defined Options
* block-ambcond::            あいまいな条件
* block-other::              その他のシステム・ドキュメント                 
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node block-idef, block-ambcond, The optional Block word set, The optional Block word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, block words
@cindex block words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item the format for display by @code{LIST}:
@cindex @code{LIST} display format
First the screen number is displayed, then 16 lines of 64 characters, each
line preceded by the line number.

@item the length of a line affected by @code{\}:
@cindex length of a line affected by @code{\}
@cindex @code{\}, line length in blocks
64 characters.
@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node block-ambcond, block-other, block-idef, The optional Block word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex block words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, block words

@table @i
@item correct block read was not possible:
@cindex block read not possible
Typically results in a @code{throw} of some OS-derived value (between -512
and -2048). If the blocks file was just not long enough, blanks are supplied
for the missing portion.

@item I/O exception in block transfer:
@cindex I/O exception in block transfer
@cindex block transfer, I/O exception
Typically results in a @code{throw} of some OS-derived value (between -512
and -2048).

@item invalid block number:
@cindex invalid block number
@cindex block number invalid
@code{-35 throw} (Invalid block number)

@item a program directly alters the contents of @code{BLK}:
@cindex @code{BLK}, altering @code{BLK}
The input stream is switched to that other block, at the same position. If
the storing to @code{BLK} happens when interpreting non-block input, the
system will get quite confused when the block ends.

@item no current block buffer for @code{UPDATE}:
@cindex @code{UPDATE}, no current block buffer
@code{UPDATE} has no effect.

@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node block-other, , block-ambcond, The optional Block word set
@subsection Other system documentation
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex other system documentation, block words
@cindex block words, other system documentation

@table @i
@item any restrictions a multiprogramming system places on the use of buffer addresses:
No restrictions (yet).

@item the number of blocks available for source and data:
depends on your disk space.

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Double Number word set, The optional Exception word set, The optional Block word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Double Number word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, double words
@cindex double words, system documentation

@menu
* double-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node double-ambcond, , The optional Double Number word set, The optional Double Number word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex double words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, double words

@table @i
@item @i{d} outside of range of @i{n} in @code{D>S}:
@cindex @code{D>S}, @i{d} out of range of @i{n}
The least significant cell of @i{d} is produced.

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Exception word set, The optional Facility word set, The optional Double Number word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Exception word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, exception words
@cindex exception words, system documentation

@menu
* exception-idef::           Implementation Defined Options              
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node exception-idef, , The optional Exception word set, The optional Exception word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, exception words
@cindex exception words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item @code{THROW}-codes used in the system:
@cindex @code{THROW}-codes used in the system
The codes -256@minus{}-511 are used for reporting signals. The mapping from
OS signal numbers to throw codes is -256@minus{}@i{signal}. The codes
-512@minus{}-2047 are used for OS errors (for file and memory allocation
operations). The mapping from OS error numbers to throw codes is
-512@minus{}@code{errno}. One side effect of this mapping is that undefined
OS errors produce a message with a strange number; e.g., @code{-1000 THROW}
results in @code{Unknown error 488} on my system.
@end table

@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Facility word set, The optional File-Access word set, The optional Exception word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Facility word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, facility words
@cindex facility words, system documentation

@menu
* facility-idef::            Implementation Defined Options
* facility-ambcond::         あいまいな条件            
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node facility-idef, facility-ambcond, The optional Facility word set, The optional Facility word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, facility words
@cindex facility words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item encoding of keyboard events (@code{EKEY}):
@cindex keyboard events, encoding in @code{EKEY}
@cindex @code{EKEY}, encoding of keyboard events
Keys corresponding to ASCII characters are encoded as ASCII characters.
Other keys are encoded with the constants @code{k-left}, @code{k-right},
@code{k-up}, @code{k-down}, @code{k-home}, @code{k-end}, @code{k1},
@code{k2}, @code{k3}, @code{k4}, @code{k5}, @code{k6}, @code{k7}, @code{k8},
@code{k9}, @code{k10}, @code{k11}, @code{k12}, @code{k-winch}, @code{k-eof}.


@item duration of a system clock tick:
@cindex duration of a system clock tick
@cindex clock tick duration
System dependent. With respect to @code{MS}, the time is specified in
microseconds. How well the OS and the hardware implement this, is another
question.

@item repeatability to be expected from the execution of @code{MS}:
@cindex repeatability to be expected from the execution of @code{MS}
@cindex @code{MS}, repeatability to be expected
System dependent. On Unix, a lot depends on load. If the system is lightly
loaded, and the delay is short enough that Gforth does not get swapped out,
the performance should be acceptable. Under MS-DOS and other single-tasking
systems, it should be good.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node facility-ambcond, , facility-idef, The optional Facility word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex facility words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, facility words

@table @i
@item @code{AT-XY} can't be performed on user output device:
@cindex @code{AT-XY} can't be performed on user output device
Largely terminal dependent. No range checks are done on the arguments.  No
errors are reported. You may see some garbage appearing, you may see simply
nothing happen.

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional File-Access word set, The optional Floating-Point word set, The optional Facility word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional File-Access word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, file words
@cindex file words, system documentation

@menu
* file-idef::                Implementation Defined Options
* file-ambcond::             あいまいな条件                
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node file-idef, file-ambcond, The optional File-Access word set, The optional File-Access word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, file words
@cindex file words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item file access methods used:
@cindex file access methods used
@code{R/O}, @code{R/W} and @code{BIN} work as you would expect. @code{W/O}
translates into the C file opening mode @code{w} (or @code{wb}): The file is
cleared, if it exists, and created, if it does not (with both
@code{open-file} and @code{create-file}).  Under Unix @code{create-file}
creates a file with 666 permissions modified by your umask.

@item file exceptions:
@cindex file exceptions
The file words do not raise exceptions (except, perhaps, memory access
faults when you pass illegal addresses or file-ids).

@item file line terminator:
@cindex file line terminator
System-dependent. Gforth uses C's newline character as line terminator. What
the actual character code(s) of this are is system-dependent.

@item file name format:
@cindex file name format
System dependent. Gforth just uses the file name format of your OS.

@item information returned by @code{FILE-STATUS}:
@cindex @code{FILE-STATUS}, returned information
@code{FILE-STATUS} returns the most powerful file access mode allowed for
the file: Either @code{R/O}, @code{W/O} or @code{R/W}. If the file cannot be
accessed, @code{R/O BIN} is returned. @code{BIN} is applicable along with
the returned mode.

@item input file state after an exception when including source:
@cindex exception when including source
All files that are left via the exception are closed.

@item @i{ior} values and meaning:
@cindex @i{ior} values and meaning
@cindex @i{wior} values and meaning
The @i{ior}s returned by the file and memory allocation words are intended
as throw codes. They typically are in the range -512@minus{}-2047 of OS
errors.  The mapping from OS error numbers to @i{ior}s is
-512@minus{}@i{errno}.

@item maximum depth of file input nesting:
@cindex maximum depth of file input nesting
@cindex file input nesting, maximum depth
limited by the amount of return stack, locals/TIB stack, and the number of
open files available. This should not give you troubles.

@item maximum size of input line:
@cindex maximum size of input line
@cindex input line size, maximum
@code{/line}. Currently 255.

@item methods of mapping block ranges to files:
@cindex mapping block ranges to files
@cindex files containing blocks
@cindex blocks in files
By default, blocks are accessed in the file @file{blocks.fb} in the current
working directory. The file can be switched with @code{USE}.

@item number of string buffers provided by @code{S"}:
@cindex @code{S"}, number of string buffers
As many as memory available; the strings are stored in memory blocks
allocated with ALLOCATE indefinitely.

@item size of string buffer used by @code{S"}:
@cindex @code{S"}, size of string buffer
@code{/line}. currently 255.

@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node file-ambcond, , file-idef, The optional File-Access word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex file words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, file words

@table @i
@item attempting to position a file outside its boundaries:
@cindex @code{REPOSITION-FILE}, outside the file's boundaries
@code{REPOSITION-FILE} is performed as usual: Afterwards,
@code{FILE-POSITION} returns the value given to @code{REPOSITION-FILE}.

@item attempting to read from file positions not yet written:
@cindex reading from file positions not yet written
End-of-file, i.e., zero characters are read and no error is reported.

@item @i{file-id} is invalid (@code{INCLUDE-FILE}):
@cindex @code{INCLUDE-FILE}, @i{file-id} is invalid
An appropriate exception may be thrown, but a memory fault or other problem
is more probable.

@item I/O exception reading or closing @i{file-id} (@code{INCLUDE-FILE}, @code{INCLUDED}):
@cindex @code{INCLUDE-FILE}, I/O exception reading or closing @i{file-id}
@cindex @code{INCLUDED}, I/O exception reading or closing @i{file-id}
The @i{ior} produced by the operation, that discovered the problem, is
thrown.

@item named file cannot be opened (@code{INCLUDED}):
@cindex @code{INCLUDED}, named file cannot be opened
The @i{ior} produced by @code{open-file} is thrown.

@item requesting an unmapped block number:
@cindex unmapped block numbers
There are no unmapped legal block numbers. On some operating systems,
writing a block with a large number may overflow the file system and have an
error message as consequence.

@item using @code{source-id} when @code{blk} is non-zero:
@cindex @code{SOURCE-ID}, behaviour when @code{BLK} is non-zero
@code{source-id} performs its function. Typically it will give the id of the
source which loaded the block. (Better ideas?)

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Floating-Point word set, The optional Locals word set, The optional File-Access word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Floating-Point word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, floating-point words
@cindex floating-point words, system documentation

@menu
* floating-idef::            Implementation Defined Options
* floating-ambcond::         あいまいな条件            
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node floating-idef, floating-ambcond, The optional Floating-Point word set, The optional Floating-Point word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, floating-point words
@cindex floating-point words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item format and range of floating point numbers:
@cindex format and range of floating point numbers
@cindex floating point numbers, format and range
System-dependent; the @code{double} type of C.

@item results of @code{REPRESENT} when @i{float} is out of range:
@cindex @code{REPRESENT}, results when @i{float} is out of range
System dependent; @code{REPRESENT} is implemented using the C library
function @code{ecvt()} and inherits its behaviour in this respect.

@item rounding or truncation of floating-point numbers:
@cindex rounding of floating-point numbers
@cindex truncation of floating-point numbers
@cindex floating-point numbers, rounding or truncation
System dependent; the rounding behaviour is inherited from the hosting C
compiler. IEEE-FP-based (i.e., most) systems by default round to nearest,
and break ties by rounding to even (i.e., such that the last bit of the
mantissa is 0).

@item size of floating-point stack:
@cindex floating-point stack size
@code{s" FLOATING-STACK" environment? drop .} gives the total size of the
floating-point stack (in floats). You can specify this on startup with the
command-line option @code{-f} (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}).

@item width of floating-point stack:
@cindex floating-point stack width
@code{1 floats}.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node floating-ambcond, , floating-idef, The optional Floating-Point word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex floating-point words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, floating-point words

@table @i
@item @code{df@@} or @code{df!} used with an address that is not double-float  aligned:
@cindex @code{df@@} or @code{df!} used with an address that is not double-float  aligned
System-dependent. Typically results in a @code{-23 THROW} like other
alignment violations.

@item @code{f@@} or @code{f!} used with an address that is not float  aligned:
@cindex @code{f@@} used with an address that is not float aligned
@cindex @code{f!} used with an address that is not float aligned
System-dependent. Typically results in a @code{-23 THROW} like other
alignment violations.

@item floating-point result out of range:
@cindex floating-point result out of range
System-dependent. Can result in a @code{-43 throw} (floating point
overflow), @code{-54 throw} (floating point underflow), @code{-41 throw}
(floating point inexact result), @code{-55 THROW} (Floating-point
unidentified fault), or can produce a special value representing, e.g.,
Infinity.

@item @code{sf@@} or @code{sf!} used with an address that is not single-float  aligned:
@cindex @code{sf@@} or @code{sf!} used with an address that is not single-float  aligned
System-dependent. Typically results in an alignment fault like other
alignment violations.

@item @code{base} is not decimal (@code{REPRESENT}, @code{F.}, @code{FE.}, @code{FS.}):
@cindex @code{base} is not decimal (@code{REPRESENT}, @code{F.}, @code{FE.}, @code{FS.})
The floating-point number is converted into decimal nonetheless.

@item Both arguments are equal to zero (@code{FATAN2}):
@cindex @code{FATAN2}, both arguments are equal to zero
System-dependent. @code{FATAN2} is implemented using the C library function
@code{atan2()}.

@item Using @code{FTAN} on an argument @i{r1} where cos(@i{r1}) is zero:
@cindex @code{FTAN} on an argument @i{r1} where cos(@i{r1}) is zero
System-dependent. Anyway, typically the cos of @i{r1} will not be zero
because of small errors and the tan will be a very large (or very small)
but finite number.

@item @i{d} cannot be presented precisely as a float in @code{D>F}:
@cindex @code{D>F}, @i{d} cannot be presented precisely as a float
The result is rounded to the nearest float.

@item dividing by zero:
@cindex dividing by zero, floating-point
@cindex floating-point dividing by zero
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, FP divide-by-zero
Platform-dependent; can produce an Infinity, NaN, @code{-42 throw} (floating
point divide by zero) or @code{-55 throw} (Floating-point unidentified
fault).

@item exponent too big for conversion (@code{DF!}, @code{DF@@}, @code{SF!}, @code{SF@@}):
@cindex exponent too big for conversion (@code{DF!}, @code{DF@@}, @code{SF!}, @code{SF@@})
System dependent. On IEEE-FP based systems the number is converted into an
infinity.

@item @i{float}<1 (@code{FACOSH}):
@cindex @code{FACOSH}, @i{float}<1
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{FACOSH}
Platform-dependent; on IEEE-FP systems typically produces a NaN.

@item @i{float}<=-1 (@code{FLNP1}):
@cindex @code{FLNP1}, @i{float}<=-1
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{FLNP1}
Platform-dependent; on IEEE-FP systems typically produces a NaN (or a
negative infinity for @i{float}=-1).

@item @i{float}<=0 (@code{FLN}, @code{FLOG}):
@cindex @code{FLN}, @i{float}<=0
@cindex @code{FLOG}, @i{float}<=0
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{FLN} or @code{FLOG}
Platform-dependent; on IEEE-FP systems typically produces a NaN (or a
negative infinity for @i{float}=0).

@item @i{float}<0 (@code{FASINH}, @code{FSQRT}):
@cindex @code{FASINH}, @i{float}<0
@cindex @code{FSQRT}, @i{float}<0
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{FASINH} or @code{FSQRT}
Platform-dependent; for @code{fsqrt} this typically gives a NaN, for
@code{fasinh} some platforms produce a NaN, others a number (bug in the C
library?).

@item |@i{float}|>1 (@code{FACOS}, @code{FASIN}, @code{FATANH}):
@cindex @code{FACOS}, |@i{float}|>1
@cindex @code{FASIN}, |@i{float}|>1
@cindex @code{FATANH}, |@i{float}|>1
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{FACOS}, @code{FASIN} or @code{FATANH}
Platform-dependent; IEEE-FP systems typically produce a NaN.

@item integer part of float cannot be represented by @i{d} in @code{F>D}:
@cindex @code{F>D}, integer part of float cannot be represented by @i{d}
@cindex floating-point unidentified fault, @code{F>D}
Platform-dependent; typically, some double number is produced and no error
is reported.

@item string larger than pictured numeric output area (@code{f.}, @code{fe.}, @code{fs.}):
@cindex string larger than pictured numeric output area (@code{f.}, @code{fe.}, @code{fs.})
@code{Precision} characters of the numeric output area are used.  If
@code{precision} is too high, these words will smash the data or code close
to @code{here}.
@end table

@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Locals word set, The optional Memory-Allocation word set, The optional Floating-Point word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Locals word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, locals words
@cindex locals words, system documentation

@menu
* locals-idef::              Implementation Defined Options
* locals-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node locals-idef, locals-ambcond, The optional Locals word set, The optional Locals word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, locals words
@cindex locals words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item maximum number of locals in a definition:
@cindex maximum number of locals in a definition
@cindex locals, maximum number in a definition
@code{s" #locals" environment? drop .}. Currently 15. This is a lower bound,
e.g., on a 32-bit machine there can be 41 locals of up to 8 characters. The
number of locals in a definition is bounded by the size of locals-buffer,
which contains the names of the locals.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node locals-ambcond, , locals-idef, The optional Locals word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex locals words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, locals words

@table @i
@item executing a named local in interpretation state:
@cindex local in interpretation state
@cindex Interpreting a compile-only word, for a local
Compiles the local into the current definition (just as in compile state);
in addition text-interpreting a local in interpretation state gives an ``is
compile-only'' warning.

@item @i{name} not defined by @code{VALUE} or @code{(LOCAL)} (@code{TO}):
@cindex name not defined by @code{VALUE} or @code{(LOCAL)} used by @code{TO}
@cindex @code{TO} on non-@code{VALUE}s and non-locals
@cindex Invalid name argument, @code{TO}
@code{-32 throw} (Invalid name argument)

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Memory-Allocation word set, The optional Programming-Tools word set, The optional Locals word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Memory-Allocation word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, memory-allocation words
@cindex memory-allocation words, system documentation

@menu
* memory-idef::              Implementation Defined Options                 
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node memory-idef, , The optional Memory-Allocation word set, The optional Memory-Allocation word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, memory-allocation words
@cindex memory-allocation words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item values and meaning of @i{ior}:
@cindex @i{ior} values and meaning
The @i{ior}s returned by the file and memory allocation words are intended
as throw codes. They typically are in the range -512@minus{}-2047 of OS
errors.  The mapping from OS error numbers to @i{ior}s is
-512@minus{}@i{errno}.

@end table

@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Programming-Tools word set, The optional Search-Order word set, The optional Memory-Allocation word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Programming-Tools word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, programming-tools words
@cindex programming-tools words, system documentation

@menu
* programming-idef::         Implementation Defined Options
* programming-ambcond::      あいまいな条件         
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node programming-idef, programming-ambcond, The optional Programming-Tools word set, The optional Programming-Tools word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, programming-tools words
@cindex programming-tools words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item ending sequence for input following @code{;CODE} and @code{CODE}:
@cindex @code{;CODE} ending sequence
@cindex @code{CODE} ending sequence
@code{END-CODE}

@item manner of processing input following @code{;CODE} and @code{CODE}:
@cindex @code{;CODE}, processing input
@cindex @code{CODE}, processing input
The @code{ASSEMBLER} vocabulary is pushed on the search order stack, and the
input is processed by the text interpreter, (starting) in interpret state.

@item search order capability for @code{EDITOR} and @code{ASSEMBLER}:
@cindex @code{ASSEMBLER}, search order capability
The Search-Order word set.

@item source and format of display by @code{SEE}:
@cindex @code{SEE}, source and format of output
The source for @code{see} is the executable code used by the inner
interpreter.  The current @code{see} tries to output Forth source code (and
on some platforms, assembly code for primitives) as well as possible.

@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node programming-ambcond, , programming-idef, The optional Programming-Tools word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex programming-tools words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, programming-tools words

@table @i

@item deleting the compilation word list (@code{FORGET}):
@cindex @code{FORGET}, deleting the compilation word list
Not implemented (yet).

@item fewer than @i{u}+1 items on the control-flow stack (@code{CS-PICK}, @code{CS-ROLL}):
@cindex @code{CS-PICK}, fewer than @i{u}+1 items on the control flow-stack
@cindex @code{CS-ROLL}, fewer than @i{u}+1 items on the control flow-stack
@cindex control-flow stack underflow
This typically results in an @code{abort"} with a descriptive error message
(may change into a @code{-22 throw} (Control structure mismatch)  in the
future). You may also get a memory access error. If you are unlucky, this
ambiguous condition is not caught.

@item @i{name} can't be found (@code{FORGET}):
@cindex @code{FORGET}, @i{name} can't be found
Not implemented (yet).

@item @i{name} not defined via @code{CREATE}:
@cindex @code{;CODE}, @i{name} not defined via @code{CREATE}
@code{;CODE} behaves like @code{DOES>} in this respect, i.e., it changes the
execution semantics of the last defined word no matter how it was defined.

@item @code{POSTPONE} applied to @code{[IF]}:
@cindex @code{POSTPONE} applied to @code{[IF]}
@cindex @code{[IF]} and @code{POSTPONE}
After defining @code{: X POSTPONE [IF] ; IMMEDIATE}. @code{X} is equivalent
to @code{[IF]}.

@item reaching the end of the input source before matching @code{[ELSE]} or @code{[THEN]}:
@cindex @code{[IF]}, end of the input source before matching @code{[ELSE]} or @code{[THEN]}
Continue in the same state of conditional compilation in the next outer
input source. Currently there is no warning to the user about this.

@item removing a needed definition (@code{FORGET}):
@cindex @code{FORGET}, removing a needed definition
Not implemented (yet).

@end table


@c =====================================================================
@node The optional Search-Order word set, , The optional Programming-Tools word set, Standard conformance
@section The optional Search-Order word set
@c =====================================================================
@cindex system documentation, search-order words
@cindex search-order words, system documentation

@menu
* search-idef::              Implementation Defined Options
* search-ambcond::           あいまいな条件              
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node search-idef, search-ambcond, The optional Search-Order word set, The optional Search-Order word set
@subsection Implementation Defined Options
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex implementation-defined options, search-order words
@cindex search-order words, implementation-defined options

@table @i
@item maximum number of word lists in search order:
@cindex maximum number of word lists in search order
@cindex search order, maximum depth
@code{s" wordlists" environment? drop .}. Currently 16.

@item minimum search order:
@cindex minimum search order
@cindex search order, minimum
@code{root root}.

@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@node search-ambcond, , search-idef, The optional Search-Order word set
@subsection Ambiguous conditions
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@cindex search-order words, ambiguous conditions
@cindex ambiguous conditions, search-order words

@table @i
@item changing the compilation word list (during compilation):
@cindex changing the compilation word list (during compilation)
@cindex compilation word list, change before definition ends
The word is entered into the word list that was the compilation word list at
the start of the definition. Any changes to the name field (e.g.,
@code{immediate}) or the code field (e.g., when executing @code{DOES>})  are
applied to the latest defined word (as reported by @code{latest} or
@code{latestxt}), if possible, irrespective of the compilation word list.

@item search order empty (@code{previous}):
@cindex @code{previous}, search order empty
@cindex vocstack empty, @code{previous}
@code{abort" Vocstack empty"}.

@item too many word lists in search order (@code{also}):
@cindex @code{also}, too many word lists in search order
@cindex vocstack full, @code{also}
@code{abort" Vocstack full"}.

@end table

@c ***************************************************************
@node Standard vs Extensions, Model, Standard conformance, Top
@chapter Should I use Gforth extensions?
@cindex Gforth extensions

As you read through the rest of this manual, you will see documentation for
@i{Standard} words, and documentation for some appealing Gforth
@i{extensions}. You might ask yourself the question: @i{``Should I restrict
myself to the standard, or should I use the extensions?''}

The answer depends on the goals you have for the program you are working on:

@itemize @bullet

@item Is it just for yourself or do you want to share it with others?

@item
If you want to share it, do the others all use Gforth?

@item
If it is just for yourself, do you want to restrict yourself to Gforth?

@end itemize

If restricting the program to Gforth is ok, then there is no reason not to
use extensions.  It is still a good idea to keep to the standard where it is
easy, in case you want to reuse these parts in another program that you want
to be portable.

If you want to be able to port the program to other Forth systems, there are
the following points to consider:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Most Forth systems that are being maintained support Standard Forth.  So if
your program complies with the standard, it will be portable among many
systems.

@item
A number of the Gforth extensions can be implemented in Standard Forth using
public-domain files provided in the @file{compat/} directory. These are
mentioned in the text in passing.  There is no reason not to use these
extensions, your program will still be Standard Forth compliant; just
include the appropriate compat files with your program.

@item
The tool @file{ans-report.fs} (@pxref{Standard Report}) makes it easy to
analyse your program and determine what non-Standard words it relies upon.
However, it does not check whether you use standard words in a non-standard
way.

@item
Some techniques are not standardized by Standard Forth, and are hard or
impossible to implement in a standard way, but can be implemented in most
Forth systems easily, and usually in similar ways (e.g., accessing word
headers).  Forth has a rich historical precedent for programmers taking
advantage of implementation-dependent features of their tools (for example,
relying on a knowledge of the dictionary structure). Sometimes these
techniques are necessary to extract every last bit of performance from the
hardware, sometimes they are just a programming shorthand.

@item
Does using a Gforth extension save more work than the porting this part to
other Forth systems (if any) will cost?

@item
Is the additional functionality worth the reduction in portability and the
additional porting problems?

@end itemize

In order to perform these considerations, you need to know what's standard
and what's not.  This manual generally states if something is non-standard,
but the authoritative source is the
@uref{https://forth-standard.org/standard/words,standard document}.
Appendix A of the Standard (@var{Rationale}) provides a valuable insight
into the thought processes of the technical committee.

Note also that portability between Forth systems is not the only portability
issue; there is also the issue of portability between different platforms
(processor/OS combinations).

@c ***************************************************************
@node Model, Integrating Gforth, Standard vs Extensions, Top
@chapter Model

This chapter has yet to be written. It will contain information, on which
internal structures you can rely.

@c ***************************************************************
@node Integrating Gforth, Emacs and Gforth, Model, Top
@chapter Integrating Gforth into C programs

Several people like to use Forth as scripting language for applications that
are otherwise written in C, C++, or some other language.

The Forth system ATLAST provides facilities for embedding it into
applications; unfortunately it has several disadvantages: most importantly,
it is not based on Standard Forth, and it is apparently dead (i.e., not
developed further and not supported). The facilities provided by Gforth in
this area are inspired by ATLAST's facilities, so making the switch should
not be hard.

We also tried to design the interface such that it can easily be implemented
by other Forth systems, so that we may one day arrive at a standardized
interface. Such a standard interface would allow you to replace the Forth
system without having to rewrite C code.

You embed the Gforth interpreter by linking with the library
@code{libgforth.a} or @code{libgforth.so} (give the compiler the option
@code{-lgforth}, or for one of the other engines @code{-lgforth-fast},
@code{-lgforth-itc}, or @code{-lgforth-ditc}).  All global symbols in this
library that belong to the interface, have the prefix @code{gforth_}; if a
common interface emerges, the functions may also be available through
@code{#define}s with the prefix @code{forth_}.

You can include the declarations of Forth types, the functions and variables
of the interface with @code{#include <gforth.h>}.

You can now run a Gforth session by either calling @code{gforth_main} or
using the components:

@example
Cell gforth_main(int argc, char **argv, char **env)
@{
  Cell retvalue=gforth_start(argc, argv);

  if(retvalue == -56) @{ /* throw-code for quit */
    retvalue = gforth_bootmessage();     // show boot message
    if(retvalue == -56)
      retvalue = gforth_quit(); // run quit loop
  @}
  gforth_cleanup();
  gforth_printmetrics();
  // gforth_free_dict(); // if you want to restart, do this

  return retvalue;
@}
@end example

To interact with the Forth interpreter, there's @code{Xt gforth_find(Char *
name)} and @code{Cell gforth_execute(Xt xt)}.

More documentation needs to be put here.

@section Types

@code{Cell}, @code{UCell}: data stack elements.

@code{Float}: float stack element.

@code{Address}, @code{Xt}, @code{Label}: pointer typies to memory, Forth
words, and Forth instructions inside the VM.

@section Variables

Data and FP Stack pointer. Area sizes. Accessing the Stacks

@code{gforth_SP}, @code{gforth_FP}.

@section Functions

@example
void *gforth_engine(Xt *, stackpointers *);
Cell gforth_main(int argc, char **argv, char **env);
int gforth_args(int argc, char **argv, char **path, char **imagename);
ImageHeader* gforth_loader(char* imagename, char* path);
user_area* gforth_stacks(Cell dsize, Cell rsize, Cell fsize, Cell lsize);
void gforth_free_stacks(user_area* t);
void gforth_setstacks(user_area * t);
void gforth_free_dict();
Cell gforth_go(Xt* ip0);
Cell gforth_boot(int argc, char** argv, char* path);
void gforth_bootmessage();
Cell gforth_start(int argc, char ** argv);
Cell gforth_quit();
Xt gforth_find(Char * name);
Cell gforth_execute(Xt xt);
void gforth_cleanup();
void gforth_printmetrics();
void gforth_setwinch();
@end example

@section Signals

Gforth sets up signal handlers to catch exceptions and window size changes.
This may interfere with your C program.

@c ******************************************************************
@node Emacs and Gforth, Image Files, Integrating Gforth, Top
@chapter Emacs and Gforth
@cindex Emacs and Gforth

@cindex @file{gforth.el}
@cindex @file{forth.el}
@cindex Rydqvist, Goran
@cindex Kuehling, David
@cindex comment editing commands
@cindex @code{\}, editing with Emacs
@cindex debug tracer editing commands
@cindex @code{~~}, removal with Emacs
@cindex Forth mode in Emacs

Gforth comes with @file{gforth.el}, an improved version of @file{forth.el}
by Goran Rydqvist (included in the TILE package). The improvements are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A better handling of indentation.
@item
A custom hilighting engine for Forth-code.
@item
Comment paragraph filling (@kbd{M-q})
@item
Commenting (@kbd{C-x \}) and uncommenting (@kbd{C-u C-x \}) of regions
@item
Removal of debugging tracers (@kbd{C-x ~}, @pxref{Debugging}).
@item
Support of the @code{info-lookup} feature for looking up the documentation
of a word.
@item
Support for reading and writing blocks files.
@end itemize

To get a basic description of these features, enter Forth mode and type
@kbd{C-h m}.

@cindex source location of error or debugging output in Emacs
@cindex error output, finding the source location in Emacs
@cindex debugging output, finding the source location in Emacs
In addition, Gforth supports Emacs quite well: The source code locations
given in error messages, debugging output (from @code{~~}) and failed
assertion messages are in the right format for Emacs' compilation mode
(@pxref{Compilation, , Running Compilations under Emacs, emacs, Emacs
Manual}) so the source location corresponding to an error or other message
is only a few keystrokes away (@kbd{C-x `} for the next error, @kbd{C-c C-c}
for the error under the cursor).

@cindex viewing the documentation of a word in Emacs
@cindex context-sensitive help
Moreover, for words documented in this manual, you can look up the glossary
entry quickly by using @kbd{C-h TAB} (@code{info-lookup-symbol},
@pxref{Documentation, ,Documentation Commands, emacs, Emacs Manual}).  This
feature requires Emacs 20.3 or later and does not work for words containing
@code{:}.

@menu
* Installing gforth.el::     Emacs に Forth を認識させる
* Emacs Tags::               ワードのソースを Emacs で閲覧
* Hilighting::               Forth コードの見栄えを良くします
* Auto-Indentation::         自動インデントのカスタマイズ
* Blocks Files::             ブロック・ファイルの読み書き
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------
@node Installing gforth.el, Emacs Tags, Emacs and Gforth, Emacs and Gforth
@section Installing gforth.el
@cindex @file{.emacs}
@cindex @file{gforth.el}, installation
To make the features from @file{gforth.el} available in Emacs, add the
following lines to your @file{.emacs} file:

@example
(autoload 'forth-mode "gforth.el")
(setq auto-mode-alist (cons '("\\.fs\\'" . forth-mode) 
			    auto-mode-alist))
(autoload 'forth-block-mode "gforth.el")
(setq auto-mode-alist (cons '("\\.fb\\'" . forth-block-mode) 
			    auto-mode-alist))
(add-hook 'forth-mode-hook (function (lambda ()
   ;; customize variables here:
   (setq forth-indent-level 4)
   (setq forth-minor-indent-level 2)
   (setq forth-hilight-level 3)
   ;;; ...
)))
@end example

@c ----------------------------------
@node Emacs Tags, Hilighting, Installing gforth.el, Emacs and Gforth
@section Emacs Tags
@cindex @file{TAGS} file
@cindex @file{etags.fs}
@cindex viewing the source of a word in Emacs
@cindex @code{require}, placement in files
@cindex @code{include}, placement in files
If you @code{require} @file{etags.fs}, a new @file{TAGS} file will be
produced (@pxref{Tags, , Tags Tables, emacs, Emacs Manual}) that contains
the definitions of all words defined afterwards. You can then find the
source for a word using @kbd{M-.}. Note that Emacs can use several tags
files at the same time (e.g., one for the Gforth sources and one for your
program, @pxref{Select Tags Table,,Selecting a Tags Table,emacs, Emacs
Manual}). The TAGS file for the preloaded words is
@file{$(datadir)/gforth/$(VERSION)/TAGS} (e.g.,
@file{/usr/local/share/gforth/0.2.0/TAGS}).  To get the best behaviour with
@file{etags.fs}, you should avoid putting definitions both before and after
@code{require} etc., otherwise you will see the same file visited several
times by commands like @code{tags-search}.

@c ----------------------------------
@node Hilighting, Auto-Indentation, Emacs Tags, Emacs and Gforth
@section Hilighting
@cindex hilighting Forth code in Emacs
@cindex highlighting Forth code in Emacs
@file{gforth.el} comes with a custom source hilighting engine.  When you
open a file in @code{forth-mode}, it will be completely parsed, assigning
faces to keywords, comments, strings etc.  While you edit the file, modified
regions get parsed and updated on-the-fly. 

Use the variable `forth-hilight-level' to change the level of decoration
from 0 (no hilighting at all) to 3 (the default).  Even if you set the
hilighting level to 0, the parser will still work in the background,
collecting information about whether regions of text are ``compiled'' or
``interpreted''.  Those information are required for auto-indentation to
work properly.  Set `forth-disable-parser' to non-nil if your computer is
too slow to handle parsing.  This will have an impact on the smartness of
the auto-indentation engine, though.

Sometimes Forth sources define new features that should be hilighted, new
control structures, defining-words etc.  You can use the variable
`forth-custom-words' to make @code{forth-mode} hilight additional words and
constructs.  See the docstring of `forth-words' for details (in Emacs, type
@kbd{C-h v forth-words}).

`forth-custom-words' is meant to be customized in your @file{.emacs} file.
To customize hilighing in a file-specific manner, set `forth-local-words' in
a local-variables section at the end of your source file (@pxref{Local
Variables in Files,, Variables, emacs, Emacs Manual}).

Example:
@example
0 [IF]
   Local Variables:
   forth-local-words:
      ((("t:") definition-starter (font-lock-keyword-face . 1)
        "[ \t\n]" t name (font-lock-function-name-face . 3))
       ((";t") definition-ender (font-lock-keyword-face . 1)))
   End:
[THEN]
@end example

@c ----------------------------------
@node Auto-Indentation, Blocks Files, Hilighting, Emacs and Gforth
@section Auto-Indentation
@cindex auto-indentation of Forth code in Emacs
@cindex indentation of Forth code in Emacs
@code{forth-mode} automatically tries to indent lines in a smart way,
whenever you type @key{TAB} or break a line with @kbd{C-m}.

Simple customization can be achieved by setting `forth-indent-level' and
`forth-minor-indent-level' in your @file{.emacs} file. For historical
reasons @file{gforth.el} indents per default by multiples of 4 columns.  To
use the more traditional 3-column indentation, add the following lines to
your @file{.emacs}:

@example
(add-hook 'forth-mode-hook (function (lambda ()
   ;; customize variables here:
   (setq forth-indent-level 3)
   (setq forth-minor-indent-level 1)
)))
@end example

If you want indentation to recognize non-default words, customize it by
setting `forth-custom-indent-words' in your @file{.emacs}.  See the
docstring of `forth-indent-words' for details (in Emacs, type @kbd{C-h v
forth-indent-words}).

To customize indentation in a file-specific manner, set
`forth-local-indent-words' in a local-variables section at the end of your
source file (@pxref{Local Variables in Files, Variables,,emacs, Emacs
Manual}).

Example:
@example
0 [IF]
   Local Variables:
   forth-local-indent-words:
      ((("t:") (0 . 2) (0 . 2))
       ((";t") (-2 . 0) (0 . -2)))
   End:
[THEN]
@end example

@c ----------------------------------
@node Blocks Files, , Auto-Indentation, Emacs and Gforth
@section Blocks Files
@cindex blocks files, use with Emacs
@code{forth-mode} Autodetects blocks files by checking whether the length of
the first line exceeds 1023 characters.  It then tries to convert the file
into normal text format.  When you save the file, it will be written to disk
as normal stream-source file.

If you want to write blocks files, use @code{forth-blocks-mode}.  It
inherits all the features from @code{forth-mode}, plus some additions:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Files are written to disk in blocks file format.
@item
Screen numbers are displayed in the mode line (enumerated beginning with the
value of `forth-block-base')
@item
Warnings are displayed when lines exceed 64 characters.
@item
The beginning of the currently edited block is marked with an overlay-arrow. 
@end itemize

There are some restrictions you should be aware of.  When you open a blocks
file that contains tabulator or newline characters, these characters will be
translated into spaces when the file is written back to disk.  If tabs or
newlines are encountered during blocks file reading, an error is output to
the echo area. So have a look at the `*Messages*' buffer, when Emacs' bell
rings during reading.

Please consult the docstring of @code{forth-blocks-mode} for more
information by typing @kbd{C-h v forth-blocks-mode}).

@c ******************************************************************
@node Image Files, Engine, Emacs and Gforth, Top
@chapter Image Files
@cindex image file
@cindex @file{.fi} files
@cindex precompiled Forth code
@cindex dictionary in persistent form
@cindex persistent form of dictionary

An image file is a file containing an image of the Forth dictionary, i.e.,
compiled Forth code and data residing in the dictionary.  By convention, we
use the extension @code{.fi} for image files.

@menu
* Image Licensing Issues::   イメージの配布条件
* Image File Background::    なぜイメージ・ファイルがあるのですか?
* Non-Relocatable Image Files::  ※これは常に機能するとは限りません
* Data-Relocatable Image Files::  ※こちらの方がよいです
* Fully Relocatable Image Files::  ※こちらの方がもっといいです
* Stack and Dictionary Sizes::  イメージでのデフォルト・サイズを設定
* Running Image Files::      @code{gforth -i @i{file}} or @i{file}.
* Modifying the Startup Sequence::  ターンキー・アプリケーションにする事もできる
@end menu

@node Image Licensing Issues, Image File Background, Image Files, Image Files
@section Image Licensing Issues
@cindex license for images
@cindex image license

An image created with @code{gforthmi} (@pxref{gforthmi}) or
@code{savesystem} (@pxref{Non-Relocatable Image Files}) includes the
original image; i.e., according to copyright law it is a derived work of the
original image.

Since Gforth is distributed under the GNU GPL, the newly created image falls
under the GNU GPL, too. In particular, this means that if you distribute the
image, you have to make all of the sources for the image available,
including those you wrote.  For details see @ref{Copying, , GNU General
Public License (Section 3)}.

If you create an image with @code{cross} (@pxref{cross.fs}), the image
contains only code compiled from the sources you gave it; if none of these
sources is under the GPL, the terms discussed above do not apply to the
image. However, if your image needs an engine (a gforth binary)  that is
under the GPL, you should make sure that you distribute both in a way that
is at most a @emph{mere aggregation}, if you don't want the terms of the GPL
to apply to the image.

@node Image File Background, Non-Relocatable Image Files, Image Licensing Issues, Image Files
@section Image File Background
@cindex image file background

Gforth consists not only of primitives (in the engine), but also of
definitions written in Forth. Since the Forth compiler itself belongs to
those definitions, it is not possible to start the system with the engine
and the Forth source alone. Therefore we provide the Forth code as an image
file in nearly executable form. When Gforth starts up, a C routine loads the
image file into memory, optionally relocates the addresses, then sets up the
memory (stacks etc.) according to information in the image file, and
(finally) starts executing Forth code.

The default image file is @file{gforth.fi} (in the @code{GFORTHPATH}).  You
can use a different image by using the @code{-i}, @code{--image-file} or
@code{--appl-image} options (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}), e.g.:

@example
gforth-fast -i myimage.fi
@end example

There are different variants of image files, and they represent different
compromises between the goals of making it easy to generate image files and
making them portable.

@cindex relocation at run-time
Win32Forth 3.4 and Mitch Bradley's @code{cforth} use relocation at
run-time. This avoids many of the complications discussed below (image files
are data relocatable without further ado), but costs performance (one
addition per memory access) and makes it difficult to pass addresses between
Forth and library calls or other programs.

@cindex relocation at load-time
By contrast, the Gforth loader performs relocation at image load time. The
loader also has to replace tokens that represent primitive calls with the
appropriate code-field addresses (or code addresses in the case of direct
threading).

There are three kinds of image files, with different degrees of
relocatability: non-relocatable, data-relocatable, and fully relocatable
image files.

@cindex image file loader
@cindex relocating loader
@cindex loader for image files
These image file variants have several restrictions in common; they are
caused by the design of the image file loader:

@itemize @bullet
@item
There is only one segment; in particular, this means, that an image file
cannot represent @code{ALLOCATE}d memory chunks (and pointers to them). The
contents of the stacks are not represented, either.

@item
The only kinds of relocation supported are: adding the same offset to all
cells that represent data addresses; and replacing special tokens with code
addresses or with pieces of machine code.

If any complex computations involving addresses are performed, the results
cannot be represented in the image file. Several applications that use such
computations come to mind:

@itemize @minus
@item
Hashing addresses (or data structures which contain addresses) for table
lookup. If you use Gforth's @code{table}s or @code{wordlist}s for this
purpose, you will have no problem, because the hash tables are recomputed
automatically when the system is started. If you use your own hash tables,
you will have to do something similar.

@item
There's a cute implementation of doubly-linked lists that uses @code{XOR}ed
addresses. You could represent such lists as singly-linked in the image
file, and restore the doubly-linked representation on startup.@footnote{In
my opinion, though, you should think thrice before using a doubly-linked
list (whatever implementation).}

@item
The code addresses of run-time routines like @code{docol:} cannot be
represented in the image file (because their tokens would be replaced by
machine code in direct threaded implementations). As a workaround, compute
these addresses at run-time with @code{>code-address} from the executions
tokens of appropriate words (see the definitions of @code{docol:} and
friends in @file{kernel/getdoers.fs}).

@item
On many architectures addresses are represented in machine code in some
shifted or mangled form. You cannot put @code{CODE} words that contain
absolute addresses in this form in a relocatable image file. Workarounds are
representing the address in some relative form (e.g., relative to the CFA,
which is present in some register), or loading the address from a place
where it is stored in a non-mangled form.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Non-Relocatable Image Files, Data-Relocatable Image Files, Image File Background, Image Files
@section Non-Relocatable Image Files
@cindex non-relocatable image files
@cindex image file, non-relocatable

These files are simple memory dumps of the dictionary. They are specific to
the executable (i.e., @file{gforth} file) they were created with. What's
worse, they are specific to the place on which the dictionary resided when
the image was created. Now, there is no guarantee that the dictionary will
reside at the same place the next time you start Gforth, so there's no
guarantee that a non-relocatable image will work the next time (Gforth will
complain instead of crashing, though).  Indeed, on OSs with (enabled)
address-space randomization non-relocatable images are unlikely to work.

You can create a non-relocatable image file with @code{savesystem}, e.g.:

@example
gforth app.fs -e "savesystem app.fi bye"
@end example

@findex savesystem ( @var{ "image" --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{savesystem}
@kindex savesystem
@format
@code{savesystem} ( @i{"image" --  }) gforth-0.2 ``savesystem''
@end format



@node Data-Relocatable Image Files, Fully Relocatable Image Files, Non-Relocatable Image Files, Image Files
@section Data-Relocatable Image Files
@cindex data-relocatable image files
@cindex image file, data-relocatable

These files contain relocatable data addresses, but fixed code addresses
(instead of tokens). They are specific to the executable (i.e.,
@file{gforth} file) they were created with.  Also, they disable dynamic
native code generation (typically a factor of 2 in speed).  You get a
data-relocatable image, if you pass the engine you want to use through the
@code{GFORTHD} environment variable to @file{gforthmi} (@pxref{gforthmi}),
e.g.

@example
GFORTHD="/usr/bin/gforth-fast --no-dynamic" gforthmi myimage.fi source.fs
@end example

Note that the @code{--no-dynamic} is required here for the image to work
(otherwise it will contain references to dynamically generated code that is
not saved in the image).


@node Fully Relocatable Image Files, Stack and Dictionary Sizes, Data-Relocatable Image Files, Image Files
@section Fully Relocatable Image Files
@cindex fully relocatable image files
@cindex image file, fully relocatable

@cindex @file{kern*.fi}, relocatability
@cindex @file{gforth.fi}, relocatability
These image files have relocatable data addresses, and tokens for code
addresses. They can be used with different binaries (e.g., with and without
debugging) on the same machine, and even across machines with the same data
formats (byte order, cell size, floating point format), and they work with
dynamic native code generation.  However, they are usually specific to the
version of Gforth they were created with. The files @file{gforth.fi} and
@file{kernl*.fi} are fully relocatable.

There are two ways to create a fully relocatable image file:

@menu
* gforthmi::                 通常の方法
* cross.fs::                 困難な方法
@end menu

@node gforthmi, cross.fs, Fully Relocatable Image Files, Fully Relocatable Image Files
@subsection @file{gforthmi}
@cindex @file{comp-i.fs}
@cindex @file{gforthmi}

You will usually use @file{gforthmi}. If you want to create an image
@i{file} that contains everything you would load by invoking Gforth with
@code{gforth @i{options}}, you simply say:
@example
gforthmi @i{file} @i{options}
@end example

E.g., if you want to create an image @file{asm.fi} that has the file
@file{asm.fs} loaded in addition to the usual stuff, you could do it like
this:

@example
gforthmi asm.fi asm.fs
@end example

@file{gforthmi} is implemented as a sh script and works like this: It
produces two non-relocatable images for different addresses and then
compares them. Its output reflects this: first you see the output (if any)
of the two Gforth invocations that produce the non-relocatable image files,
then you see the output of the comparing program: It displays the offset
used for data addresses and the offset used for code addresses; moreover,
for each cell that cannot be represented correctly in the image files, it
displays a line like this:

@example
     78DC         BFFFFA50         BFFFFA40
@end example

This means that at offset $78dc from @code{forthstart}, one input image
contains $bffffa50, and the other contains $bffffa40. Since these cells
cannot be represented correctly in the output image, you should examine
these places in the dictionary and verify that these cells are dead (i.e.,
not read before they are written).

@cindex --application, @code{gforthmi} option
If you insert the option @code{--application} in front of the image file
name, you will get an image that uses the @code{--appl-image} option instead
of the @code{--image-file} option (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}). When you
execute such an image on Unix (by typing the image name as command), the
Gforth engine will pass all options to the image instead of trying to
interpret them as engine options.

If you type @file{gforthmi} with no arguments, it prints some usage
instructions.

@cindex @code{savesystem} during @file{gforthmi}
@cindex @code{bye} during @file{gforthmi}
@cindex doubly indirect threaded code
@cindex environment variables
@cindex @code{GFORTHD} -- environment variable
@cindex @code{GFORTH} -- environment variable
@cindex @code{gforth-ditc}
There are a few wrinkles: After processing the passed @i{options}, the words
@code{savesystem} and @code{bye} must be visible. A special doubly indirect
threaded version of the @file{gforth} executable is used for creating the
non-relocatable images; you can pass the exact filename of this executable
through the environment variable @code{GFORTHD} (default:
@file{gforth-ditc}); if you pass a version that is not doubly indirect
threaded, you will not get a fully relocatable image, but a data-relocatable
image (@pxref{Data-Relocatable Image Files}), because there is no code
address offset). The normal @file{gforth} executable is used for creating
the relocatable image; you can pass the exact filename of this executable
through the environment variable @code{GFORTH}.

@node cross.fs, , gforthmi, Fully Relocatable Image Files
@subsection @file{cross.fs}
@cindex @file{cross.fs}
@cindex cross-compiler
@cindex metacompiler
@cindex target compiler

You can also use @code{cross}, a batch compiler that accepts a Forth-like
programming language (@pxref{Cross Compiler}).

@code{cross} allows you to create image files for machines with different
data sizes and data formats than the one used for generating the image
file. You can also use it to create an application image that does not
contain a Forth compiler. These features are bought with restrictions and
inconveniences in programming. E.g., addresses have to be stored in memory
with special words (@code{A!}, @code{A,}, etc.) in order to make the code
relocatable.


@node Stack and Dictionary Sizes, Running Image Files, Fully Relocatable Image Files, Image Files
@section Stack and Dictionary Sizes
@cindex image file, stack and dictionary sizes
@cindex dictionary size default
@cindex stack size default

If you invoke Gforth with a command line flag for the size (@pxref{Invoking
Gforth}), the size you specify is stored in the dictionary. If you save the
dictionary with @code{savesystem} or create an image with @file{gforthmi},
this size will become the default for the resulting image file. E.g., the
following will create a fully relocatable version of @file{gforth.fi} with a
1MB dictionary:

@example
gforthmi gforth.fi -m 1M
@end example

In other words, if you want to set the default size for the dictionary and
the stacks of an image, just invoke @file{gforthmi} with the appropriate
options when creating the image.

@cindex stack size, cache-friendly
Note: For cache-friendly behaviour (i.e., good performance), you should make
the sizes of the stacks modulo, say, 2K, somewhat different. E.g., the
default stack sizes are: data: 16k (mod 2k=0); fp: 15.5k (mod 2k=1.5k);
return: 15k(mod 2k=1k); locals: 14.5k (mod 2k=0.5k).

@node Running Image Files, Modifying the Startup Sequence, Stack and Dictionary Sizes, Image Files
@section Running Image Files
@cindex running image files
@cindex invoking image files
@cindex image file invocation

@cindex -i, invoke image file
@cindex --image file, invoke image file
You can invoke Gforth with an image file @i{image} instead of the default
@file{gforth.fi} with the @code{-i} flag (@pxref{Invoking Gforth}):
@example
gforth -i @i{image}
@end example

@cindex executable image file
@cindex image file, executable
If your operating system supports starting scripts with a line of the form
@code{#! ...}, you just have to type the image file name to start Gforth
with this image file (note that the file extension @code{.fi} is just a
convention). I.e., to run Gforth with the image file @i{image}, you can just
type @i{image} instead of @code{gforth -i @i{image}}.  This works because
every @code{.fi} file starts with a line of this format:

@example
#! /usr/local/bin/gforth-0.4.0 -i
@end example

The file and pathname for the Gforth engine specified on this line is the
specific Gforth executable that it was built against; i.e. the value of the
environment variable @code{GFORTH} at the time that @file{gforthmi} was
executed.

You can make use of the same shell capability to make a Forth source file
into an executable. For example, if you place this text in a file:

@example
#! /usr/local/bin/gforth

." Hello, world" CR
bye
@end example

@noindent
and then make the file executable (chmod +x in Unix), you can run it
directly from the command line. The sequence @code{#!} is used in two ways;
firstly, it is recognised as a ``magic sequence'' by the operating
system@footnote{The Unix kernel actually recognises two types of files:
executable files and files of data, where the data is processed by an
interpreter that is specified on the ``interpreter line'' -- the first line
of the file, starting with the sequence #!. There may be a small limit
(e.g., 32) on the number of characters that may be specified on the
interpreter line.} secondly it is treated as a comment character by
Gforth. Because of the second usage, a space is required between @code{#!}
and the path to the executable (moreover, some Unixes require the sequence
@code{#! /}).

Most Unix systems (including Linux) support exactly one option after the
binary name.  If that is not enough, you can use the following trick:

@example
#! /bin/sh
: ## ; 0 [if]
exec gforth -m 10M -d 1M $0 "$@@"
[then]
." Hello, world" cr
bye \ caution: this prevents (further) processing of "$@@"
@end example

First this script is interpreted as shell script, which treats the first two
lines as (mostly) comments, then performs the third line, which invokes
gforth with this script (@code{$0}) as parameter and its parameters as
additional parameters (@code{"$@@"}).  Then this script is interpreted as
Forth script, which first defines a colon definition @code{##}, then ignores
everything up to @code{[then]} and finally processes the following Forth
code.  You can also use

@example
#0 [if]
@end example

in the second line, but this works only in Gforth-0.7.0 and later.

The @file{gforthmi} approach is the fastest one, the shell-based one is
slowest (needs to start an additional shell).  An additional advantage of
the shell approach is that it is unnecessary to know where the Gforth binary
resides, as long as it is in the @code{$PATH}.

@findex #! ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{#!}
@kindex #!
@format
@code{#!} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``hash-bang''
@end format
An alias for @code{\}




@node Modifying the Startup Sequence, , Running Image Files, Image Files
@section Modifying the Startup Sequence
@cindex startup sequence for image file
@cindex image file initialization sequence
@cindex initialization sequence of image file

You can add your own initialization to the startup sequence of an image
through the deferred word @code{'cold}. @code{'cold} is invoked just before
the image-specific command line processing (i.e., loading files and
evaluating (@code{-e}) strings) starts.

A sequence for adding your initialization usually looks like this:

@example
:noname
    Defers 'cold \ do other initialization stuff (e.g., rehashing wordlists)
    ... \ your stuff
; IS 'cold
@end example

After @code{'cold}, Gforth processes the image options (@pxref{Invoking
Gforth}), and then it performs @code{bootmessage}, another deferred word.
This normally prints Gforth's startup message and does nothing else.

@cindex turnkey image files
@cindex image file, turnkey applications
So, if you want to make a turnkey image (i.e., an image for an application
instead of an extended Forth system), you can do this in several ways:

@itemize @bullet

@item
If you want to do your interpretation of the OS command-line arguments, hook
into @code{'cold}.  In that case you probably also want to build the image
with @code{gforthmi --application} (@pxref{gforthmi}) to keep the engine
from processing OS command line options.  You can then do your own
command-line processing with @code{next-arg} 

@item
If you want to have the normal Gforth processing of OS command-line
arguments, but specify your own command-line options, hook into
@code{process-option}.

@item
If you want to have more options in addition to the ones that come with
Gforth, define words into the @code{options} vocabulary.

@item
If you want to display your own boot message, hook into @code{bootmessage}.

@end itemize

In either case, you probably do not want the word that you execute in these
hooks to exit normally, but use @code{bye} or @code{throw}.  Otherwise the
Gforth startup process would continue and eventually present the Forth
command line to the user.

@findex 'cold ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.2
@cindex @code{'cold}
@kindex 'cold
@format
@code{'cold} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.2 ``tick-cold''
@end format
Hook (deferred word) for things to do right before interpreting the OS
command-line arguments.  Normally does some initializations that you also
want to perform.


@findex bootmessage ( @var{ --   } ) gforth-0.4
@cindex @code{bootmessage}
@kindex bootmessage
@format
@code{bootmessage} ( @i{--  }) gforth-0.4 ``bootmessage''
@end format
Hook (deferred word) executed right after interpreting the OS command-line
arguments.  Normally prints the Gforth startup message.


doc-'quit
@findex process-option ( @var{ addr u -- true / addr u false   } ) gforth-0.7
@cindex @code{process-option}
@kindex process-option
@format
@code{process-option} ( @i{addr u -- true / addr u false  }) gforth-0.7 ``process-option''
@end format
Process an option @var{addr u}, return true, if the option is processed;
unprocessed options are loaded as files throu @code{required}.



@c ******************************************************************
@node Engine, Cross Compiler, Image Files, Top
@chapter Engine
@cindex engine
@cindex virtual machine

Reading this chapter is not necessary for programming with Gforth. It may be
helpful for finding your way in the Gforth sources.

The ideas in this section have also been published in the following papers:
Bernd Paysan, @cite{ANS fig/GNU/??? Forth} (in German), Forth-Tagung '93;
M. Anton Ertl,
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl93.ps.Z, A Portable
Forth Engine}}, EuroForth '93; M. Anton Ertl,
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl02.ps.gz, Threaded
code variations and optimizations (extended version)}}, Forth-Tagung '02.

@menu
* Portability::
* Threading::
* Primitives::
* Performance::              
@end menu

@node Portability, Threading, Engine, Engine
@section Portability
@cindex engine portability

An important goal of the Gforth Project is availability across a wide range
of personal machines. fig-Forth, and, to a lesser extent, F83, achieved this
goal by manually coding the engine in assembly language for several
then-popular processors. This approach is very labor-intensive and the
results are short-lived due to progress in computer architecture.

@cindex C, using C for the engine
Others have avoided this problem by coding in C, e.g., Mitch Bradley
(cforth), Mikael Patel (TILE) and Dirk Zoller (pfe). This approach is
particularly popular for UNIX-based Forths due to the large variety of
architectures of UNIX machines. Unfortunately an implementation in C does
not mix well with the goals of efficiency and with using traditional
techniques: Indirect or direct threading cannot be expressed in C, and
switch threading, the fastest technique available in C, is significantly
slower. Another problem with C is that it is very cumbersome to express
double integer arithmetic.

@cindex GNU C for the engine
@cindex long long
Fortunately, there is a portable language that does not have these
limitations: GNU C, the version of C processed by the GNU C compiler
(@pxref{C Extensions, , Extensions to the C Language Family, gcc, GNU C
Manual}). Its labels as values feature (@pxref{Labels as Values, , Labels as
Values, gcc, GNU C Manual}) makes direct and indirect threading possible,
its @code{long long} type (@pxref{Long Long, , Double-Word Integers, gcc,
GNU C Manual}) corresponds to Forth's double numbers on many systems.  GNU C
is freely available on all important (and many unimportant) UNIX machines,
VMS, 80386s running MS-DOS, the Amiga, and the Atari ST, so a Forth written
in GNU C can run on all these machines.

Writing in a portable language has the reputation of producing code that is
slower than assembly. For our Forth engine we repeatedly looked at the code
produced by the compiler and eliminated most compiler-induced inefficiencies
by appropriate changes in the source code.

@cindex explicit register declarations
@cindex --enable-force-reg, configuration flag
@cindex -DFORCE_REG
However, register allocation cannot be portably influenced by the
programmer, leading to some inefficiencies on register-starved machines. We
use explicit register declarations (@pxref{Explicit Reg Vars, , Variables in
Specified Registers, gcc, GNU C Manual}) to improve the speed on some
machines. They are turned on by using the configuration flag
@code{--enable-force-reg} (@code{gcc} switch
@code{-DFORCE_REG}). Unfortunately, this feature not only depends on the
machine, but also on the compiler version: On some machines some compiler
versions produce incorrect code when certain explicit register declarations
are used. So by default @code{-DFORCE_REG} is not used.

@node Threading, Primitives, Portability, Engine
@section Threading
@cindex inner interpreter implementation
@cindex threaded code implementation

@cindex labels as values
GNU C's labels as values extension (available since @code{gcc-2.0},
@pxref{Labels as Values, , Labels as Values, gcc, GNU C Manual})  makes it
possible to take the address of @i{label} by writing @code{&&@i{label}}.
This address can then be used in a statement like @code{goto
*@i{address}}. I.e., @code{goto *&&x} is the same as @code{goto x}.

@cindex @code{NEXT}, indirect threaded
@cindex indirect threaded inner interpreter
@cindex inner interpreter, indirect threaded
With this feature an indirect threaded @code{NEXT} looks like:
@example
cfa = *ip++;
ca = *cfa;
goto *ca;
@end example
@cindex instruction pointer
For those unfamiliar with the names: @code{ip} is the Forth instruction
pointer; the @code{cfa} (code-field address) corresponds to Standard Forth's
execution token and points to the code field of the next word to be
executed; The @code{ca} (code address) fetched from there points to some
executable code, e.g., a primitive or the colon definition handler
@code{docol}.

@cindex @code{NEXT}, direct threaded
@cindex direct threaded inner interpreter
@cindex inner interpreter, direct threaded
Direct threading is even simpler:
@example
ca = *ip++;
goto *ca;
@end example

Of course we have packaged the whole thing neatly in macros called
@code{NEXT} and @code{NEXT1} (the part of @code{NEXT} after fetching the
cfa).

@menu
* Scheduling::
* Direct or Indirect Threaded?::
* Dynamic Superinstructions::
* DOES>::                    
@end menu

@node Scheduling, Direct or Indirect Threaded?, Threading, Threading
@subsection Scheduling
@cindex inner interpreter optimization

There is a little complication: Pipelined and superscalar processors, i.e.,
RISC and some modern CISC machines can process independent instructions
while waiting for the results of an instruction. The compiler usually
reorders (schedules) the instructions in a way that achieves good usage of
these delay slots. However, on our first tries the compiler did not do well
on scheduling primitives. E.g., for @code{+} implemented as
@example
n=sp[0]+sp[1];
sp++;
sp[0]=n;
NEXT;
@end example
the @code{NEXT} comes strictly after the other code, i.e., there is nearly
no scheduling. After a little thought the problem becomes clear: The
compiler cannot know that @code{sp} and @code{ip} point to different
addresses (and the version of @code{gcc} we used would not know it even if
it was possible), so it could not move the load of the cfa above the store
to the TOS. Indeed the pointers could be the same, if code on or very near
the top of stack were executed. In the interest of speed we chose to forbid
this probably unused ``feature'' and helped the compiler in scheduling:
@code{NEXT} is divided into several parts: @code{NEXT_P0}, @code{NEXT_P1}
and @code{NEXT_P2}). @code{+} now looks like:
@example
NEXT_P0;
n=sp[0]+sp[1];
sp++;
NEXT_P1;
sp[0]=n;
NEXT_P2;
@end example

There are various schemes that distribute the different operations of NEXT
between these parts in several ways; in general, different schemes perform
best on different processors.  We use a scheme for most architectures that
performs well for most processors of this architecture; in the future we may
switch to benchmarking and chosing the scheme on installation time.


@node Direct or Indirect Threaded?, Dynamic Superinstructions, Scheduling, Threading
@subsection Direct or Indirect Threaded?
@cindex threading, direct or indirect?

Threaded forth code consists of references to primitives (simple machine
code routines like @code{+}) and to non-primitives (e.g., colon definitions,
variables, constants); for a specific class of non-primitives (e.g.,
variables) there is one code routine (e.g., @code{dovar}), but each variable
needs a separate reference to its data.

Traditionally Forth has been implemented as indirect threaded code, because
this allows to use only one cell to reference a non-primitive (basically you
point to the data, and find the code address there).

@cindex primitive-centric threaded code
However, threaded code in Gforth (since 0.6.0) uses two cells for
non-primitives, one for the code address, and one for the data address; the
data pointer is an immediate argument for the virtual machine instruction
represented by the code address.  We call this @emph{primitive-centric}
threaded code, because all code addresses point to simple primitives.  E.g.,
for a variable, the code address is for @code{lit} (also used for integer
literals like @code{99}).

Primitive-centric threaded code allows us to use (faster) direct threading
as dispatch method, completely portably (direct threaded code in Gforth
before 0.6.0 required architecture-specific code).  It also eliminates the
performance problems related to I-cache consistency that 386 implementations
have with direct threaded code, and allows additional optimizations.

@cindex hybrid direct/indirect threaded code
There is a catch, however: the @var{xt} parameter of @code{execute} can
occupy only one cell, so how do we pass non-primitives with their code
@emph{and} data addresses to them? Our answer is to use indirect threaded
dispatch for @code{execute} and other words that use a single-cell xt.  So,
normal threaded code in colon definitions uses direct threading, and
@code{execute} and similar words, which dispatch to xts on the data stack,
use indirect threaded code.  We call this @emph{hybrid direct/indirect}
threaded code.

@cindex engines, gforth vs.@: gforth-fast vs.@: gforth-itc
@cindex gforth engine
@cindex gforth-fast engine
The engines @command{gforth} and @command{gforth-fast} use hybrid
direct/indirect threaded code.  This means that with these engines you
cannot use @code{,} to compile an xt.  Instead, you have to use
@code{compile,}.

@cindex gforth-itc engine
If you want to compile xts with @code{,}, use @command{gforth-itc}.  This
engine uses plain old indirect threaded code.  It still compiles in a
primitive-centric style, so you cannot use @code{compile,} instead of
@code{,} (e.g., for producing tables of xts with @code{] word1 word2
... [}).  If you want to do that, you have to use @command{gforth-itc} and
execute @code{' , is compile,}.  Your program can check if it is running on
a hybrid direct/indirect threaded engine or a pure indirect threaded engine
with @code{threading-method} (@pxref{Threading Words}).


@node Dynamic Superinstructions, DOES>, Direct or Indirect Threaded?, Threading
@subsection Dynamic Superinstructions
@cindex Dynamic superinstructions with replication
@cindex Superinstructions
@cindex Replication

The engines @command{gforth} and @command{gforth-fast} use another
optimization: Dynamic superinstructions with replication.  As an example,
consider the following colon definition:

@example
: squared ( n1 -- n2 )
  dup * ;
@end example

Gforth compiles this into the threaded code sequence

@example
dup
*
;s
@end example

Use @code{simple-see} (@pxref{Examining compiled code}) to see the threaded
code of a colon definition.

In normal direct threaded code there is a code address occupying one cell
for each of these primitives.  Each code address points to a machine code
routine, and the interpreter jumps to this machine code in order to execute
the primitive.  The routines for these three primitives are (in
@command{gforth-fast} on the 386):

@example
Code dup  
( $804B950 )  add     esi , # -4  \ $83 $C6 $FC 
( $804B953 )  add     ebx , # 4  \ $83 $C3 $4 
( $804B956 )  mov     dword ptr 4 [esi] , ecx  \ $89 $4E $4 
( $804B959 )  jmp     dword ptr FC [ebx]  \ $FF $63 $FC 
end-code
Code *  
( $804ACC4 )  mov     eax , dword ptr 4 [esi]  \ $8B $46 $4 
( $804ACC7 )  add     esi , # 4  \ $83 $C6 $4 
( $804ACCA )  add     ebx , # 4  \ $83 $C3 $4 
( $804ACCD )  imul    ecx , eax  \ $F $AF $C8 
( $804ACD0 )  jmp     dword ptr FC [ebx]  \ $FF $63 $FC 
end-code
Code ;s  
( $804A693 )  mov     eax , dword ptr [edi]  \ $8B $7 
( $804A695 )  add     edi , # 4  \ $83 $C7 $4 
( $804A698 )  lea     ebx , dword ptr 4 [eax]  \ $8D $58 $4 
( $804A69B )  jmp     dword ptr FC [ebx]  \ $FF $63 $FC 
end-code
@end example

With dynamic superinstructions and replication the compiler does not just
lay down the threaded code, but also copies the machine code fragments,
usually without the jump at the end.

@example
( $4057D27D )  add     esi , # -4  \ $83 $C6 $FC 
( $4057D280 )  add     ebx , # 4  \ $83 $C3 $4 
( $4057D283 )  mov     dword ptr 4 [esi] , ecx  \ $89 $4E $4 
( $4057D286 )  mov     eax , dword ptr 4 [esi]  \ $8B $46 $4 
( $4057D289 )  add     esi , # 4  \ $83 $C6 $4 
( $4057D28C )  add     ebx , # 4  \ $83 $C3 $4 
( $4057D28F )  imul    ecx , eax  \ $F $AF $C8 
( $4057D292 )  mov     eax , dword ptr [edi]  \ $8B $7 
( $4057D294 )  add     edi , # 4  \ $83 $C7 $4 
( $4057D297 )  lea     ebx , dword ptr 4 [eax]  \ $8D $58 $4 
( $4057D29A )  jmp     dword ptr FC [ebx]  \ $FF $63 $FC 
@end example

Only when a threaded-code control-flow change happens (e.g., in @code{;s}),
the jump is appended.  This optimization eliminates many of these jumps and
makes the rest much more predictable.  The speedup depends on the processor
and the application; on the Athlon and Pentium III this optimization
typically produces a speedup by a factor of 2.

The code addresses in the direct-threaded code are set to point to the
appropriate points in the copied machine code, in this example like this:

@example
primitive  code address
   dup       $4057D27D
   *         $4057D286
   ;s        $4057D292
@end example

Thus there can be threaded-code jumps to any place in this piece of code.
This also simplifies decompilation quite a bit.

@code{See-code} (@pxref{Examining compiled code}) shows the threaded code
intermingled with the native code of dynamic superinstructions.  These days
some additional optimizations are applied for the dynamically-generated
native code, so the output of @code{see-code squared} on @code{gforth-fast}
on one particular AMD64 installation looks like this:

@example
$7FB689C678C8 dup    1->2 
7FB68990C1B2:   mov     r15,r8
$7FB689C678D0 *    2->1 
7FB68990C1B5:   imul    r8,r15
$7FB689C678D8 ;s    1->1 
7FB68990C1B9:   mov     rbx,[r14]
7FB68990C1BC:   add     r14,$08
7FB68990C1C0:   mov     rax,[rbx]
7FB68990C1C3:   jmp     eax
@end example

@cindex --no-dynamic command-line option
@cindex --no-super command-line option
You can disable this optimization with @option{--no-dynamic}.  You can use
the copying without eliminating the jumps (i.e., dynamic replication, but
without superinstructions) with @option{--no-super}; this gives the branch
prediction benefit alone; the effect on performance depends on the CPU; on
the Athlon and Pentium III the speedup is a little less than for dynamic
superinstructions with replication.

@cindex patching threaded code
One use of these options is if you want to patch the threaded code.  With
superinstructions, many of the dispatch jumps are eliminated, so patching
often has no effect.  These options preserve all the dispatch jumps.

@cindex --dynamic command-line option
On some machines dynamic superinstructions are disabled by default, because
it is unsafe on these machines.  However, if you feel adventurous, you can
enable it with @option{--dynamic}.

@node DOES>, , Dynamic Superinstructions, Threading
@subsection DOES>
@cindex @code{DOES>} implementation

@cindex @code{dodoes} routine
@cindex @code{DOES>}-code
One of the most complex parts of a Forth engine is @code{dodoes}, i.e., the
chunk of code executed by every word defined by a
@code{CREATE}...@code{DOES>} pair; actually with primitive-centric code,
this is only needed if the xt of the word is @code{execute}d. The main
problem here is: How to find the Forth code to be executed, i.e. the code
after the @code{DOES>} (the @code{DOES>}-code)? There are two solutions:

In fig-Forth the code field points directly to the @code{dodoes} and the
@code{DOES>}-code address is stored in the cell after the code address
(i.e. at @code{@i{CFA} cell+}). It may seem that this solution is illegal in
the Forth-79 and all later standards, because in fig-Forth this address lies
in the body (which is illegal in these standards). However, by making the
code field larger for all words this solution becomes legal again.  We use
this approach.  Leaving a cell unused in most words is a bit wasteful, but
on the machines we are targeting this is hardly a problem.


@node Primitives, Performance, Threading, Engine
@section Primitives
@cindex primitives, implementation
@cindex virtual machine instructions, implementation

@menu
* Automatic Generation::
* TOS Optimization::
* Produced code::            
@end menu

@node Automatic Generation, TOS Optimization, Primitives, Primitives
@subsection Automatic Generation
@cindex primitives, automatic generation

@cindex @file{prims2x.fs}

Since the primitives are implemented in a portable language, there is no
longer any need to minimize the number of primitives. On the contrary,
having many primitives has an advantage: speed. In order to reduce the
number of errors in primitives and to make programming them easier, we
provide a tool, the primitive generator (@file{prims2x.fs} aka Vmgen,
@pxref{Top, Vmgen, Introduction, vmgen, Vmgen}), that automatically
generates most (and sometimes all) of the C code for a primitive from the
stack effect notation.  The source for a primitive has the following form:

@cindex primitive source format
@format
@i{Forth-name}  ( @i{stack-effect} )        @i{category}    [@i{pronounc.}]
[@code{""}@i{glossary entry}@code{""}]
@i{C code}
[@code{:}
@i{Forth code}]
@end format

The items in brackets are optional. The category and glossary fields are
there for generating the documentation, the Forth code is there for manual
implementations on machines without GNU C. E.g., the source for the
primitive @code{+} is:
@example
+    ( n1 n2 -- n )   core    plus
n = n1+n2;
@end example

This looks like a specification, but in fact @code{n = n1+n2} is C code. Our
primitive generation tool extracts a lot of information from the stack
effect notations@footnote{We use a one-stack notation, even though we have
separate data and floating-point stacks; The separate notation can be
generated easily from the unified notation.}: The number of items popped
from and pushed on the stack, their type, and by what name they are referred
to in the C code. It then generates a C code prelude and postlude for each
primitive. The final C code for @code{+} looks like this:

@example
I_plus: /* + ( n1 n2 -- n ) */  /* label, stack effect */
/*  */                          /* documentation */
NAME("+")                       /* debugging output (with -DDEBUG) */
@{
DEF_CA                          /* definition of variable ca (indirect threading) */
Cell n1;                        /* definitions of variables */
Cell n2;
Cell n;
NEXT_P0;                        /* NEXT part 0 */
n1 = (Cell) sp[1];              /* input */
n2 = (Cell) TOS;
sp += 1;                        /* stack adjustment */
@{
n = n1+n2;                      /* C code taken from the source */
@}
NEXT_P1;                        /* NEXT part 1 */
TOS = (Cell)n;                  /* output */
NEXT_P2;                        /* NEXT part 2 */
@}
@end example

This looks long and inefficient, but the GNU C compiler optimizes quite well
and produces optimal code for @code{+} on, e.g., the R3000 and the HP RISC
machines: Defining the @code{n}s does not produce any code, and using them
as intermediate storage also adds no cost.

There are also other optimizations that are not illustrated by this example:
assignments between simple variables are usually for free (copy
propagation). If one of the stack items is not used by the primitive (e.g.
in @code{drop}), the compiler eliminates the load from the stack (dead code
elimination). On the other hand, there are some things that the compiler
does not do, therefore they are performed by @file{prims2x.fs}: The compiler
does not optimize code away that stores a stack item to the place where it
just came from (e.g., @code{over}).

While programming a primitive is usually easy, there are a few cases where
the programmer has to take the actions of the generator into account, most
notably @code{?dup}, but also words that do not (always)  fall through to
@code{NEXT}.

For more information

@node TOS Optimization, Produced code, Automatic Generation, Primitives
@subsection TOS Optimization
@cindex TOS optimization for primitives
@cindex primitives, keeping the TOS in a register

An important optimization for stack machine emulators, e.g., Forth engines,
is keeping one or more of the top stack items in registers.  If a word has
the stack effect @i{in1}...@i{inx} @code{--} @i{out1}...@i{outy}, keeping
the top @i{n} items in registers
@itemize @bullet
@item
is better than keeping @i{n-1} items, if @i{x>=n} and @i{y>=n}, due to fewer
loads from and stores to the stack.
@item is slower than keeping @i{n-1} items, if @i{x<>y} and @i{x<n} and
@i{y<n}, due to additional moves between registers.
@end itemize

@cindex -DUSE_TOS
@cindex -DUSE_NO_TOS
In particular, keeping one item in a register is never a disadvantage, if
there are enough registers. Keeping two items in registers is a disadvantage
for frequent words like @code{?branch}, constants, variables, literals and
@code{i}. Therefore our generator only produces code that keeps zero or one
items in registers. The generated C code covers both cases; the selection
between these alternatives is made at C-compile time using the switch
@code{-DUSE_TOS}. @code{TOS} in the C code for @code{+} is just a simple
variable name in the one-item case, otherwise it is a macro that expands
into @code{sp[0]}. Note that the GNU C compiler tries to keep simple
variables like @code{TOS} in registers, and it usually succeeds, if there
are enough registers.

@cindex -DUSE_FTOS
@cindex -DUSE_NO_FTOS
The primitive generator performs the TOS optimization for the floating-point
stack, too (@code{-DUSE_FTOS}). For floating-point operations the benefit of
this optimization is even larger: floating-point operations take quite long
on most processors, but can be performed in parallel with other operations
as long as their results are not used. If the FP-TOS is kept in a register,
this works. If it is kept on the stack, i.e., in memory, the store into
memory has to wait for the result of the floating-point operation,
lengthening the execution time of the primitive considerably.

The TOS optimization makes the automatic generation of primitives a bit more
complicated. Just replacing all occurrences of @code{sp[0]} by @code{TOS} is
not sufficient. There are some special cases to consider:
@itemize @bullet
@item In the case of @code{dup ( w -- w w )} the generator must not
eliminate the store to the original location of the item on the stack, if
the TOS optimization is turned on.
@item Primitives with stack effects of the form @code{--}
@i{out1}...@i{outy} must store the TOS to the stack at the start.  Likewise,
primitives with the stack effect @i{in1}...@i{inx} @code{--} must load the
TOS from the stack at the end. But for the null stack effect @code{--} no
stores or loads should be generated.
@end itemize

@node Produced code, , TOS Optimization, Primitives
@subsection Produced code
@cindex primitives, assembly code listing

@cindex @file{engine.s}
To see what assembly code is produced for the primitives on your machine
with your compiler and your flag settings, type @code{make engine.s} and
look at the resulting file @file{engine.s}.  Alternatively, you can also
disassemble the code of primitives with @code{see} on some architectures.

@node Performance, , Primitives, Engine
@section Performance
@cindex performance of some Forth interpreters
@cindex engine performance
@cindex benchmarking Forth systems
@cindex Gforth performance

On RISCs the Gforth engine is very close to optimal; i.e., it is usually
impossible to write a significantly faster threaded-code engine.

On register-starved machines like the 386 architecture processors
improvements are possible, because @code{gcc} does not utilize the registers
as well as a human, even with explicit register declarations; e.g., Bernd
Beuster wrote a Forth system fragment in assembly language and hand-tuned it
for the 486; this system is 1.19 times faster on the Sieve benchmark on a
486DX2/66 than Gforth compiled with @code{gcc-2.6.3} with
@code{-DFORCE_REG}.  The situation has improved with gcc-2.95 and
gforth-0.4.9; now the most important virtual machine registers fit in real
registers (and we can even afford to use the TOS optimization), resulting in
a speedup of 1.14 on the sieve over the earlier results.  And dynamic
superinstructions provide another speedup (but only around a factor 1.2 on
the 486).

@cindex Win32Forth performance
@cindex NT Forth performance
@cindex eforth performance
@cindex ThisForth performance
@cindex PFE performance
@cindex TILE performance
The potential advantage of assembly language implementations is not
necessarily realized in complete Forth systems: We compared Gforth-0.5.9
(direct threaded, compiled with @code{gcc-2.95.1} and @code{-DFORCE_REG})
with Win32Forth 1.2093 (newer versions are reportedly much faster), LMI's NT
Forth (Beta, May 1994) and Eforth (with and without peephole (aka pinhole)
optimization of the threaded code); all these systems were written in
assembly language. We also compared Gforth with three systems written in C:
PFE-0.9.14 (compiled with @code{gcc-2.6.3} with the default configuration
for Linux: @code{-O2 -fomit-frame-pointer -DUSE_REGS -DUNROLL_NEXT}),
ThisForth Beta (compiled with @code{gcc-2.6.3 -O3 -fomit-frame-pointer};
ThisForth employs peephole optimization of the threaded code) and TILE
(compiled with @code{make opt}). We benchmarked Gforth, PFE, ThisForth and
TILE on a 486DX2/66 under Linux. Kenneth O'Heskin kindly provided the
results for Win32Forth and NT Forth on a 486DX2/66 with similar memory
performance under Windows NT. Marcel Hendrix ported Eforth to Linux, then
extended it to run the benchmarks, added the peephole optimizer, ran the
benchmarks and reported the results.

We used four small benchmarks: the ubiquitous Sieve; bubble-sorting and
matrix multiplication come from the Stanford integer benchmarks and have
been translated into Forth by Martin Fraeman; we used the versions included
in the TILE Forth package, but with bigger data set sizes; and a recursive
Fibonacci number computation for benchmarking calling performance. The
following table shows the time taken for the benchmarks scaled by the time
taken by Gforth (in other words, it shows the speedup factor that Gforth
achieved over the other systems).

@example
relative       Win32-    NT       eforth       This-      
time     Gforth Forth Forth eforth  +opt   PFE Forth  TILE
sieve      1.00  2.16  1.78   2.16  1.32  2.46  4.96 13.37
bubble     1.00  1.93  2.07   2.18  1.29  2.21        5.70
matmul     1.00  1.92  1.76   1.90  0.96  2.06        5.32
fib        1.00  2.32  2.03   1.86  1.31  2.64  4.55  6.54
@end example

You may be quite surprised by the good performance of Gforth when compared
with systems written in assembly language. One important reason for the
disappointing performance of these other systems is probably that they are
not written optimally for the 486 (e.g., they use the @code{lods}
instruction). In addition, Win32Forth uses a comfortable, but costly method
for relocating the Forth image: like @code{cforth}, it computes the actual
addresses at run time, resulting in two address computations per @code{NEXT}
(@pxref{Image File Background}).

The speedup of Gforth over PFE, ThisForth and TILE can be easily explained
with the self-imposed restriction of the latter systems to standard C, which
makes efficient threading impossible (however, the measured implementation
of PFE uses a GNU C extension: @pxref{Global Reg Vars, , Defining Global
Register Variables, gcc, GNU C Manual}).  Moreover, current C compilers have
a hard time optimizing other aspects of the ThisForth and the TILE source.

The performance of Gforth on 386 architecture processors varies widely with
the version of @code{gcc} used. E.g., @code{gcc-2.5.8} failed to allocate
any of the virtual machine registers into real machine registers by itself
and would not work correctly with explicit register declarations, giving a
significantly slower engine (on a 486DX2/66 running the Sieve) than the one
measured above.

Note that there have been several releases of Win32Forth since the release
presented here, so the results presented above may have little predictive
value for the performance of Win32Forth today (results for the current
release on an i486DX2/66 are welcome).

@cindex @file{Benchres}
In
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/papers/ertl&maierhofer95.ps.gz,
Translating Forth to Efficient C}} by M. Anton Ertl and Martin Maierhofer
(presented at EuroForth '95), an indirect threaded version of Gforth is
compared with Win32Forth, NT Forth, PFE, ThisForth, and several native code
systems; that version of Gforth is slower on a 486 than the version used
here. You can find a newer version of these measurements at
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/performance.html}. You can
find numbers for Gforth on various machines in @file{Benchres}.

@c ******************************************************************
@c @node Binding to System Library, Cross Compiler, Engine, Top
@c @chapter Binding to System Library

@c ****************************************************************
@node Cross Compiler, MINOS2, Engine, Top
@chapter Cross Compiler
@cindex @file{cross.fs}
@cindex cross-compiler
@cindex metacompiler
@cindex target compiler

The cross compiler is used to bootstrap a Forth kernel. Since Gforth is
mostly written in Forth, including crucial parts like the outer interpreter
and compiler, it needs compiled Forth code to get started. The cross
compiler allows to create new images for other architectures, even running
under another Forth system.

@menu
* Using the Cross Compiler::
* How the Cross Compiler Works::  
@end menu

@node Using the Cross Compiler, How the Cross Compiler Works, Cross Compiler, Cross Compiler
@section Using the Cross Compiler

The cross compiler uses a language that resembles Forth, but isn't. The main
difference is that you can execute Forth code after definition, while you
usually can't execute the code compiled by cross, because the code you are
compiling is typically for a different computer than the one you are
compiling on.

@c anton: This chapter is somewhat different from waht I would expect: I
@c would expect an explanation of the cross language and how to create an
@c application image with it.  The section explains some aspects of
@c creating a Gforth kernel.

The Makefile is already set up to allow you to create kernels for new
architectures with a simple make command. The generic kernels using the GCC
compiled virtual machine are created in the normal build process with
@code{make}. To create a embedded Gforth executable for e.g. the 8086
processor (running on a DOS machine), type

@example
make kernl-8086.fi
@end example

This will use the machine description from the @file{arch/8086} directory to
create a new kernel. A machine file may look like that:

@example
\ Parameter for target systems                         06oct92py

    4 Constant cell             \ cell size in bytes
    2 Constant cell<<           \ cell shift to bytes
    5 Constant cell>bit         \ cell shift to bits
    8 Constant bits/char        \ bits per character
    8 Constant bits/byte        \ bits per byte [default: 8]
    8 Constant float            \ bytes per float
    8 Constant /maxalign        \ maximum alignment in bytes
false Constant bigendian        \ byte order
( true=big, false=little )

include machpc.fs               \ feature list
@end example

This part is obligatory for the cross compiler itself, the feature list is
used by the kernel to conditionally compile some features in and out,
depending on whether the target supports these features.

There are some optional features, if you define your own primitives, have an
assembler, or need special, nonstandard preparation to make the boot process
work. @code{asm-include} includes an assembler, @code{prims-include}
includes primitives, and @code{>boot} prepares for booting.

@example
: asm-include    ." Include assembler" cr
  s" arch/8086/asm.fs" included ;

: prims-include  ." Include primitives" cr
  s" arch/8086/prim.fs" included ;

: >boot          ." Prepare booting" cr
  s" ' boot >body into-forth 1+ !" evaluate ;
@end example

These words are used as sort of macro during the cross compilation in the
file @file{kernel/main.fs}. Instead of using these macros, it would be
possible --- but more complicated --- to write a new kernel project file,
too.

@file{kernel/main.fs} expects the machine description file name on the
stack; the cross compiler itself (@file{cross.fs}) assumes that either
@code{mach-file} leaves a counted string on the stack, or
@code{machine-file} leaves an address, count pair of the filename on the
stack.

The feature list is typically controlled using @code{SetValue}, generic
files that are used by several projects can use @code{DefaultValue}
instead. Both functions work like @code{Value}, when the value isn't
defined, but @code{SetValue} works like @code{to} if the value is defined,
and @code{DefaultValue} doesn't set anything, if the value is defined.

@example
\ generic mach file for pc gforth                       03sep97jaw

true DefaultValue NIL  \ relocating

>ENVIRON

true DefaultValue file          \ controls the presence of the
                                \ file access wordset
true DefaultValue OS            \ flag to indicate a operating system

true DefaultValue prims         \ true: primitives are c-code

true DefaultValue floating      \ floating point wordset is present

true DefaultValue glocals       \ gforth locals are present
                                \ will be loaded
true DefaultValue dcomps        \ double number comparisons

true DefaultValue hash          \ hashing primitives are loaded/present

true DefaultValue xconds        \ used together with glocals,
                                \ special conditionals supporting gforths'
                                \ local variables
true DefaultValue header        \ save a header information

true DefaultValue backtrace     \ enables backtrace code

false DefaultValue ec
false DefaultValue crlf

cell 2 = [IF] &32 [ELSE] &256 [THEN] KB DefaultValue kernel-size

&16 KB          DefaultValue stack-size
&15 KB &512 +   DefaultValue fstack-size
&15 KB          DefaultValue rstack-size
&14 KB &512 +   DefaultValue lstack-size
@end example

@node How the Cross Compiler Works, , Using the Cross Compiler, Cross Compiler
@section How the Cross Compiler Works

@node MINOS2, Bugs, Cross Compiler, Top
@chapter MINOS2, a GUI library

@menu
* MINOS2 object framework::
* MINOS2 tutorial::          
@end menu

@node MINOS2 object framework, MINOS2 tutorial, MINOS2, MINOS2
@section MINOS2 object framework

@menu
* actor methods::
* widget methods::           
@end menu

MINOS2 is a GUI library, written in @file{mini-oof2.fs}'s object model.  It
has two main class hierarchies:

@findex actor ( @var{ -- class   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{actor}
@kindex actor
@format
@code{actor} ( @i{-- class  }) minos2 ``actor''
@end format
class for the actions bound to a component.


@findex widget ( @var{ -- class   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{widget}
@kindex widget
@format
@code{widget} ( @i{-- class  }) minos2 ``widget''
@end format
class for visual components



@node actor methods, widget methods, MINOS2 object framework, MINOS2 object framework
@subsection @code{actor} methods:

@findex caller-w ( @var{ -- optr   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{caller-w}
@kindex caller-w
@format
@code{caller-w} ( @i{-- optr  }) minos2 ``caller-w''
@end format
pointer back to the widget embedding the actor


@findex active-w ( @var{ -- optr   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{active-w}
@kindex active-w
@format
@code{active-w} ( @i{-- optr  }) minos2 ``active-w''
@end format
pointer to the active subwidget embedding the actor


@findex act-name$ ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{act-name$}
@kindex act-name$
@format
@code{act-name$} ( @i{-- addr u  }) minos2 ``act-name-string''
@end format
Debugging aid: name of the actor


@findex clicked ( @var{ rx ry bmask n --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{clicked}
@kindex clicked
@format
@code{clicked} ( @i{rx ry bmask n --  }) minos2 ``clicked''
@end format
processed clicks


@findex scrolled ( @var{ axis dir --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{scrolled}
@kindex scrolled
@format
@code{scrolled} ( @i{axis dir --  }) minos2 ``scrolled''
@end format
process scrolling


@findex touchdown ( @var{ $rxy*n bmask --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{touchdown}
@kindex touchdown
@format
@code{touchdown} ( @i{$rxy*n bmask --  }) minos2 ``touchdown''
@end format
raw click down


@findex touchup ( @var{ $rxy*n bmask --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{touchup}
@kindex touchup
@format
@code{touchup} ( @i{$rxy*n bmask --  }) minos2 ``touchup''
@end format
raw click up


@findex ukeyed ( @var{ addr u --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{ukeyed}
@kindex ukeyed
@format
@code{ukeyed} ( @i{addr u --  }) minos2 ``ukeyed''
@end format
key event, string of printable unicode characters


@findex ekeyed ( @var{ ekey --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{ekeyed}
@kindex ekeyed
@format
@code{ekeyed} ( @i{ekey --  }) minos2 ``ekeyed''
@end format
key event, non-printable key


@findex ?inside ( @var{ rx ry -- act / 0   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{?inside}
@kindex ?inside
@format
@code{?inside} ( @i{rx ry -- act / 0  }) minos2 ``query-inside''
@end format
check if coordinates are inside the widget


@findex focus ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{focus}
@kindex focus
@format
@code{focus} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``focus''
@end format
put widget into focus


@findex defocus ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{defocus}
@kindex defocus
@format
@code{defocus} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``defocus''
@end format
put widget out of focus


@findex entered ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{entered}
@kindex entered
@format
@code{entered} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``entered''
@end format
react on cursor entering the widget area


@findex left ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{left}
@kindex left
@format
@code{left} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``left''
@end format
react on cursor leaving the widget area


@findex show ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{show}
@kindex show
@format
@code{show} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``show''
@end format
widget is shown


@findex hide ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{hide}
@kindex hide
@format
@code{hide} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``hide''
@end format
widget is hidden


@findex get ( @var{ -- something   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{get}
@kindex get
@format
@code{get} ( @i{-- something  }) minos2 ``get''
@end format
getter for the value behind the widget


@findex set ( @var{ something --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{set}
@kindex set
@format
@code{set} ( @i{something --  }) minos2 ``set''
@end format
setter for the value behind the widget


@findex show-you ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{show-you}
@kindex show-you
@format
@code{show-you} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``show-you''
@end format
make widget visible



@node widget methods, , actor methods, MINOS2 object framework
@subsection @code{widget} methods:

@findex parent-w ( @var{ -- optr   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{parent-w}
@kindex parent-w
@format
@code{parent-w} ( @i{-- optr  }) minos2 ``parent-w''
@end format
pointer to parent widget


@findex act ( @var{ -- optr   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{act}
@kindex act
@format
@code{act} ( @i{-- optr  }) minos2 ``act''
@end format
pointer to actor


@findex name$ ( @var{ -- addr u   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{name$}
@kindex name$
@format
@code{name$} ( @i{-- addr u  }) minos2 ``name-string''
@end format
Widget name for debugging and searching


@findex x ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{x}
@kindex x
@format
@code{x} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``x''
@end format
widget x coordinate


@findex y ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{y}
@kindex y
@format
@code{y} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``y''
@end format
widget y coordinate


@findex w ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{w}
@kindex w
@format
@code{w} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``w''
@end format
widget width


@findex h ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{h}
@kindex h
@format
@code{h} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``h''
@end format
widget height above baseline


@findex d ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{d}
@kindex d
@format
@code{d} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``d''
@end format
widget depth below baseline


@findex gap ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{gap}
@kindex gap
@format
@code{gap} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``gap''
@end format
gap between lines


@findex baseline ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{baseline}
@kindex baseline
@format
@code{baseline} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``baseline''
@end format
minimun skip per line


@findex kerning ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{kerning}
@kindex kerning
@format
@code{kerning} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``kerning''
@end format
add kerning


@findex raise ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{raise}
@kindex raise
@format
@code{raise} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``raise''
@end format
raise/lower box


@findex border ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{border}
@kindex border
@format
@code{border} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``border''
@end format
surrounding border, all directions


@findex borderv ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{borderv}
@kindex borderv
@format
@code{borderv} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``borderv''
@end format
vertical border offset


@findex bordert ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{bordert}
@kindex bordert
@format
@code{bordert} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``bordert''
@end format
top border offset


@findex borderl ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{borderl}
@kindex borderl
@format
@code{borderl} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``borderl''
@end format
left border offset


@findex w-color ( @var{ -- r   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{w-color}
@kindex w-color
@format
@code{w-color} ( @i{-- r  }) minos2 ``w-color''
@end format
widget color index (into color map), if any


@findex draw-init ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{draw-init}
@kindex draw-init
@format
@code{draw-init} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``draw-init''
@end format
init draw


@findex draw ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{draw}
@kindex draw
@format
@code{draw} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``draw''
@end format
draw widget


@findex split ( @var{ firstflag rstart1 rx -- o rstart2   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{split}
@kindex split
@format
@code{split} ( @i{firstflag rstart1 rx -- o rstart2  }) minos2 ``split''
@end format
split a widget into parts for typesetting paragraphs


@findex lastfit ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{lastfit}
@kindex lastfit
@format
@code{lastfit} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``lastfit''
@end format
fit last widget element in a box


@findex hglue ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{hglue}
@kindex hglue
@format
@code{hglue} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``hglue''
@end format
calculate horizontal glue


@findex dglue ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{dglue}
@kindex dglue
@format
@code{dglue} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``dglue''
@end format
calculate vertical glue below baseline


@findex vglue ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vglue}
@kindex vglue
@format
@code{vglue} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``vglue''
@end format
calculate vertical glue above baseline


@findex hglue@@ ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{hglue@@}
@kindex hglue@@
@format
@code{hglue@@} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``hglue-fetch''
@end format
cached variant of @code{hglue}


@findex dglue@@ ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{dglue@@}
@kindex dglue@@
@format
@code{dglue@@} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``dglue-fetch''
@end format
cached variant of @code{dglue}


@findex vglue@@ ( @var{ -- rtyp rsub radd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vglue@@}
@kindex vglue@@
@format
@code{vglue@@} ( @i{-- rtyp rsub radd  }) minos2 ``vglue-fetch''
@end format
cached variant of @code{vglue}


@findex xywh ( @var{ -- rx0 ry0 rw rh   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{xywh}
@kindex xywh
@format
@code{xywh} ( @i{-- rx0 ry0 rw rh  }) minos2 ``xywh''
@end format
widget bounding box, starting at the top left corner


@findex xywhd ( @var{ -- rx ry rw rh rd   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{xywhd}
@kindex xywhd
@format
@code{xywhd} ( @i{-- rx ry rw rh rd  }) minos2 ``xywhd''
@end format
widget bounding box, starting at the left baseline point


@findex !resize ( @var{ rx ry rw rh rd --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{!resize}
@kindex !resize
@format
@code{!resize} ( @i{rx ry rw rh rd --  }) minos2 ``store-resize''
@end format
resize a widget


@findex !size ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{!size}
@kindex !size
@format
@code{!size} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``store-size''
@end format
let the widget self-determine its size


@findex dispose-widget ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{dispose-widget}
@kindex dispose-widget
@format
@code{dispose-widget} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``dispose-widget''
@end format
get rid of a widget


@findex .widget ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{.widget}
@kindex .widget
@format
@code{.widget} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``print-widget''
@end format
debugging: Print informations about the widget


@findex par-split ( @var{ rw --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{par-split}
@kindex par-split
@format
@code{par-split} ( @i{rw --  }) minos2 ``par-split''
@end format
split a paragraph by width @var{rw}


@findex resized ( @var{ --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{resized}
@kindex resized
@format
@code{resized} ( @i{--  }) minos2 ``resized''
@end format
widget is resized



Components are composed using a boxes&glue model similar to @LaTeX{},
including paragraph breaking.  For the sake of simplicity and portability,
MINOS2 only supports a single window, and uses OpenGL for rendering.

MINOS2 furthermore supports animations with the @code{animation} class.  A
color index texture is used for different color schemes, and transition
between neighboring schemes can also be animated.

@findex >animate ( @var{ rdelta addr xt --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{>animate}
@kindex >animate
@format
@code{>animate} ( @i{rdelta addr xt --  }) minos2 ``to-animate''
@end format
create a new animation, calling @var{xt} with stack effect @code{( addr
r0..1 -- )} repeatedly, until the @var{rdelta} timeout expired; last call is
always with argument @var{1e} for the time.



You can create named color indexes and assign them color values for the
currently active color scheme.

@findex color: ( @var{ rgba "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{color:}
@kindex color:
@format
@code{color:} ( @i{rgba "name" --  }) minos2 ``color:''
@end format
Create a (possibly shared) color index initialized with @var{rgba}


@findex new-color: ( @var{ rgba "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{new-color:}
@kindex new-color:
@format
@code{new-color:} ( @i{rgba "name" --  }) minos2 ``new-color:''
@end format
Create a unique color index initialized with @var{rgba}


@findex text-color: ( @var{ rgba "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{text-color:}
@kindex text-color:
@format
@code{text-color:} ( @i{rgba "name" --  }) minos2 ``text-color:''
@end format
Create a unique text color index initialized with @var{rgba}, the
corresponding emoji color is set to white.


@findex text-emoji-color: ( @var{ rgbatext rgbaemoji "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{text-emoji-color:}
@kindex text-emoji-color:
@format
@code{text-emoji-color:} ( @i{rgbatext rgbaemoji "name" --  }) minos2 ``text-emoji-color:''
@end format
Create a unique text color index initialized with @var{rgbatext}, the
corresponding emoji color is set to @var{rgbaemoji}.


@findex fade-color: ( @var{ rgba1 rgba2 "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{fade-color:}
@kindex fade-color:
@format
@code{fade-color:} ( @i{rgba1 rgba2 "name" --  }) minos2 ``fade-color:''
@end format
Create a unique pair of text color index initialized with @var{rgba1} and
@var{rgba2}, the corresponding emoji color is set to white. By slowly
shifting the index from one to the next index, the object will shift its
color using a linear interpolation when redrawn.


@findex text-emoji-fade-color: ( @var{ rgbatext1 ~2 rgbaemoji1 ~2 "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{text-emoji-fade-color:}
@kindex text-emoji-fade-color:
@format
@code{text-emoji-fade-color:} ( @i{rgbatext1 ~2 rgbaemoji1 ~2 "name" --  }) minos2 ``text-emoji-fade-color:''
@end format
Create a unique pair of text color index initialized with @var{rgbatext1}
and @var{~2}, the corresponding emoji color pair is set to @var{rgbaemoji1}
to @var{~2}. By slowly shifting the index from one to the next index, the
object will shift its color using a linear interpolation when redrawn.


@findex re-color ( @var{ rgba "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{re-color}
@kindex re-color
@format
@code{re-color} ( @i{rgba "name" --  }) minos2 ``re-color''
@end format
assign the named color index @var{"name"} in the current color scheme with
the value @var{rgba}.


@findex re-text-color ( @var{ rgba "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{re-text-color}
@kindex re-text-color
@format
@code{re-text-color} ( @i{rgba "name" --  }) minos2 ``re-text-color''
@end format
assign the named text color index @var{"name"} in the current color scheme
with the value @var{rgba}.


@findex re-emoji-color ( @var{ rgbatext rgbaemoji "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{re-emoji-color}
@kindex re-emoji-color
@format
@code{re-emoji-color} ( @i{rgbatext rgbaemoji "name" --  }) minos2 ``re-emoji-color''
@end format
assign the named text and emoji color index @var{"name"} in the current
color scheme with the value @var{rgbatext} and @var{rgbaemoji}.


@findex re-fade-color ( @var{ rgba1 rgba2 "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{re-fade-color}
@kindex re-fade-color
@format
@code{re-fade-color} ( @i{rgba1 rgba2 "name" --  }) minos2 ``re-fade-color''
@end format
assign the named color index pair @var{"name"} in the current color scheme
with the value @var{rgba1} and @var{rgba2}.


@findex re-text-emoji-fade-color ( @var{ rgbatext1 ~2 rgbaemoji1 ~2 "name" --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{re-text-emoji-fade-color}
@kindex re-text-emoji-fade-color
@format
@code{re-text-emoji-fade-color} ( @i{rgbatext1 ~2 rgbaemoji1 ~2 "name" --  }) minos2 ``re-text-emoji-fade-color''
@end format
assign the named color index pair @var{"name"} in the current color scheme
with the value @var{rgbatext1} and @var{~2} resp. @var{rgbaemoji1} and
@var{~2}.



For a number of specific objects, there are early bound methods, that only
work on these objects

@itemize @bullet
@item Viewport

@findex vp-top ( @var{ o:vp --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-top}
@kindex vp-top
@format
@code{vp-top} ( @i{o:vp --  }) minos2 ``vp-top''
@end format
scroll viewport to top


@findex vp-bottom ( @var{ o:vp --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-bottom}
@kindex vp-bottom
@format
@code{vp-bottom} ( @i{o:vp --  }) minos2 ``vp-bottom''
@end format
scroll viewport to bottom


@findex vp-left ( @var{ o:vp --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-left}
@kindex vp-left
@format
@code{vp-left} ( @i{o:vp --  }) minos2 ``vp-left''
@end format
scroll viewport to left


@findex vp-right ( @var{ o:vp --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-right}
@kindex vp-right
@format
@code{vp-right} ( @i{o:vp --  }) minos2 ``vp-right''
@end format
scroll viewport to right


@findex vp-reslide ( @var{ o:vp --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-reslide}
@kindex vp-reslide
@format
@code{vp-reslide} ( @i{o:vp --  }) minos2 ``vp-reslide''
@end format
Adjust the sliders of a viewport after scrolling


@findex vp-needed ( @var{ xt --   } ) minos2
@cindex @code{vp-needed}
@kindex vp-needed
@format
@code{vp-needed} ( @i{xt --  }) minos2 ``vp-needed''
@end format
collect needs in viewport's vp-need



@end itemize

@node MINOS2 tutorial, , MINOS2 object framework, MINOS2
@section MINOS2 tutorial

Tutorials are small files, each showing a bit of MINOS2.  For the common
framework, the file @file{minos2/tutorial/tutorial.fs} needs to be loaded
first; all other tutorials in the command line argument are included from
within that file.  Scroll wheel or previous/next mouse buttons as well as
clicking on the left or right edge of the window allow navigation between
the different tutorials loaded.

I.e. to load the buttons tutorial, you start Gforth with

@example
gforth minos2/tutorial/tutorial.fs buttons.fs
@end example

Available tutorials:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@file{buttons.fs}: Clickable buttons

@item
@file{plots.fs}: Plot functions

@item
@file{markdown.fs}: Markdown document viewer

@item
@file{screenshot.fs}: Screenshot function
@end itemize

@node Bugs, Origin, MINOS2, Top
@appendix Bugs
@cindex bug reporting

Known bugs are described in the file @file{BUGS} in the Gforth distribution.

If you find a bug, please submit a bug report through
@uref{https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?func=addbug&group=gforth}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
A program (or a sequence of keyboard commands) that reproduces the bug.
@item
A description of what you think constitutes the buggy behaviour.
@item
The Gforth version used (it is announced at the start of an interactive
Gforth session).
@item
The machine and operating system (on Unix systems @code{uname -a} will
report this information).
@item
The installation options (you can find the configure options at the start of
@file{config.status}) and configuration (@code{configure} output or
@file{config.cache}).
@item
A complete list of changes (if any) you (or your installer) have made to the
Gforth sources.
@end itemize

For a thorough guide on reporting bugs read @ref{Bug Reporting, , How to
Report Bugs, gcc, GNU C Manual}.


@node Origin, Forth-related information, Bugs, Top
@appendix Authors and Ancestors of Gforth

@section Authors and Contributors
@cindex authors of Gforth
@cindex contributors to Gforth

The Gforth project was started in mid-1992 by Bernd Paysan and Anton
Ertl. The third major author was Jens Wilke.  Neal Crook contributed a lot
to the manual.  Assemblers and disassemblers were contributed by Andrew
McKewan, Christian Pirker, Bernd Thallner, and Michal Revucky.  Lennart
Benschop (who was one of Gforth's first users, in mid-1993)  and Stuart
Ramsden inspired us with their continuous feedback. Lennart Benshop
contributed @file{glosgen.fs}, while Stuart Ramsden has been working on
automatic support for calling C libraries. Helpful comments also came from
Paul Kleinrubatscher, Christian Pirker, Dirk Zoller, Marcel Hendrix, John
Wavrik, Barrie Stott, Marc de Groot, Jorge Acerada, Bruce Hoyt, Robert
Epprecht, Dennis Ruffer and David N. Williams. Since the release of
Gforth-0.2.1 there were also helpful comments from many others; thank you
all, sorry for not listing you here (but digging through my mailbox to
extract your names is on my to-do list).

Gforth also owes a lot to the authors of the tools we used (GCC, CVS, and
autoconf, among others), and to the creators of the Internet: Gforth was
developed across the Internet, and its authors did not meet physically for
the first 4 years of development.

@section Pedigree
@cindex pedigree of Gforth

Gforth descends from bigFORTH (1993) and fig-Forth.  Of course, a
significant part of the design of Gforth was prescribed by Standard Forth.

Bernd Paysan wrote bigFORTH, a descendent from TurboForth, an unreleased 32
bit native code version of VolksForth for the Atari ST, written mostly by
Dietrich Weineck.

VolksForth was written by Klaus Schleisiek, Bernd Pennemann, Georg Rehfeld
and Dietrich Weineck for the C64 (called UltraForth there) in the mid-80s
and ported to the Atari ST in 1986.  It descends from fig-Forth.

@c Henry Laxen and Mike Perry wrote F83 as a model implementation of the
@c Forth-83 standard. !! Pedigree? When?

A team led by Bill Ragsdale implemented fig-Forth on many processors in
1979. Robert Selzer and Bill Ragsdale developed the original implementation
of fig-Forth for the 6502 based on microForth.

The principal architect of microForth was Dean Sanderson. microForth was
FORTH, Inc.'s first off-the-shelf product. It was developed in 1976 for the
1802, and subsequently implemented on the 8080, the 6800 and the Z80.

All earlier Forth systems were custom-made, usually by Charles Moore, who
discovered (as he puts it) Forth during the late 60s. The first full Forth
existed in 1971.

A part of the information in this section comes from
@cite{@uref{https://www.forth.com/resources/evolution/index.html,The
Evolution of Forth}} by Elizabeth D. Rather, Donald R. Colburn and Charles
H. Moore, presented at the HOPL-II conference and preprinted in SIGPLAN
Notices 28(3), 1993.  You can find more historical and genealogical
information about Forth there.  For a more general (and graphical) Forth
family tree look see
@cite{@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/family-tree/}, Forth
Family Tree and Timeline}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Forth-related information, Licenses, Origin, Top
@appendix Other Forth-related information
@cindex Forth-related information

@c anton: I threw most of this stuff out, because it can be found through
@c the FAQ and the FAQ is more likely to be up-to-date.

@cindex comp.lang.forth
@cindex frequently asked questions
There is an active news group (comp.lang.forth) discussing Forth (including
Gforth) and Forth-related issues. Its
@uref{https://www.complang.tuwien.ac.at/forth/faq/faq-general-2.html,FAQs}
(frequently asked questions and their answers) contains a lot of information
on Forth.  You should read it before posting to comp.lang.forth.

The Forth standard is most usable in its @uref{https://forth-standard.org/,
HTML form}.

@c ---------------------------------------------------
@node Licenses, Word Index, Forth-related information, Top
@appendix Licenses

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  このマニュアルのコピー時のライセンス
* Copying::                  GPL (このソフトウェアのコピー用)
@end menu

@node GNU Free Documentation License, Copying, Licenses, Licenses
@appendixsec GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Copying, , GNU Free Documentation License, Licenses
@appendixsec GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@include gpl.texi



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Word Index, Concept Index, Licenses, Top
@unnumbered Word Index

This index is a list of Forth words that have ``glossary'' entries within
this manual. Each word is listed with its stack effect and wordset.

@printindex fn

@c anton: the name index seems superfluous given the word and concept indices.

@c @node Name Index, Concept Index, Word Index, Top
@c @unnumbered Name Index

@c This index is a list of Forth words that have ``glossary'' entries
@c within this manual.

@c @printindex ky

@c -------------------------------------------------------
@node Concept Index, , Word Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept and Word Index

Not all entries listed in this index are present verbatim in the text. This
index also duplicates, in abbreviated form, all of the words listed in the
Word Index (only the names are listed for the words here).

@printindex cp

@bye



